---
author: Charles Stuart Calverley 
title: Juno's Speech. - Translations From Horace.
---

OD. iii. 3.


The just man's single-purposed mind
 Not furious mobs that prompt to ill
 May move, nor kings' frowns shake his will
Which is as rock; not warrior-winds

That keep the seas in wild unrest;
 Nor bolt by Jove's own finger hurled:
 The fragments of a shivered world
Would crash round him still self-possest.

Jove's wandering son reached, thus endowed,
 The fiery bastions of the skies;
 Thus Pollux; with them Caesar lies
Beside his nectar, radiant-browed.

For this rewarded, tiger-drawn
 Rode Bacchus, reining necks before
 Untamed; for this War's horses bore
Quirinus up from Acheron,

When in heav'n's conclave Juno said,
 Thrice welcomed: "Troy is in the dust;
 Troy, by a judge accursed, unjust,
And that strange woman prostrated.

"The day Laomedon ignored
 His god-pledged word, resigned to me
 And Pallas ever-pure, was she,
Her people, and their traitor lord.

"No more the Greek girl's guilty guest
 Sits splendour-girt: Priam's perjured sons
 Find not against the mighty ones
Of Greece a shield in Hector's breast:

"And, long drawn out by private jars,
 The war sleeps. Lo! my wrath is o'er:
 And him the Trojan vestal bore
(Sprung of that hated line) to Mars,

"To Mars restore I. His be rest
 In halls of light: by him be drained
 The nectar-bowl, his place obtained
In the calm companies of the blest.

"While betwixt Rome and Ilion raves
 A length of ocean, where they will
 Rise empires for the exiles still:
While Paris's and Priam's graves

"Are hoof-trod, and the she-wolf breeds
 Securely there, unharmed shall stand
 Rome's lustrous Capitol, her hand
Impose proud laws on trampled Medes.

"Wide-feared, to far-off climes be borne
 Her story; where the central main
 Europe and Libya parts in twain,
Where full Nile laves a land of corn:

"The buried secret of the mine,
 (Best left there) resolute to spurn,
 And not to man's base uses turn
With hand that spares not things divine.

"Earth's utmost end, where'er it be,
 May her hosts reach; careering proud
 O'er lands where watery rain and cloud,
Or where wild suns hold revelry.

"But, to the soldier-sons of Rome,
 Tied by this law, such fates are willed;
 That they seek never to rebuild,
Too fond, too bold, their grandsires' home.

"With darkest omens, deadliest strife,
 Shall Troy, raised up again, repeat
 Her history; I the victor-fleet
Shall lead, Jove's sister and his wife.

"Thrice let Apollo rear the wall
 Of brass; and thrice my Greeks shall hew
 The fabric down; thrice matrons rue
In chains their sons', their husbands' fall."

Ill my light lyre such notes beseem.
 Stay, Muse; nor, wayward still, rehearse
 God-utterances in puny verse
That may but mar a mighty theme.
