---
author: Charles Stuart Calverley 
title: In The Gloaming.
---

In the Gloaming to be roaming, where the crested waves are foaming,
 And the shy mermaidens combing locks that ripple to their feet;
When the Gloaming is, I never made the ghost of an endeavour
 To discover - but whatever were the hour, it would be sweet.

"To their feet," I say, for Leech's sketch indisputably teaches
 That the mermaids of our beaches do not end in ugly tails,
Nor have homes among the corals; but are shod with neat balmorals,
 An arrangement no one quarrels with, as many might with scales.

Sweet to roam beneath a shady cliff, of course with some young lady,
 Lalage, Neaera, Haidee, or Elaine, or Mary Ann:
Love, you dear delusive dream, you! Very sweet your victims deem you,
 When, heard only by the seamew, they talk all the stuff one can.

Sweet to haste, a licensed lover, to Miss Pinkerton the glover,
 Having managed to discover what is dear Neaera's "size":
P'raps to touch that wrist so slender, as your tiny gift you tender,
 And to read you're no offender, in those laughing hazel eyes.
	
Then to hear her call you "Harry," when she makes you fetch and carry -
 O young men about to marry, what a blessed thing it is!
To be photograph'd - together - cased in pretty Russia leather -
 Hear her gravely doubting whether they have spoilt your honest phiz!
	
Then to bring your plighted fair one first a ring - a rich and rare one -
 Next a bracelet, if she'll wear one, and a heap of things beside;
And serenely bending o'er her, to inquire if it would bore her
 To say when her own adorer may aspire to call her bride!
	
Then, the days of courtship over, with your WIFE to start for Dover
 Or Dieppe - and live in clover evermore, whate'er befalls:
For I've read in many a novel that, unless they've souls that grovel,
 Folks PREFER in fact a hovel to your dreary marble halls:
	
To sit, happy married lovers; Phillis trifling with a plover's
 Egg, while Corydon uncovers with a grace the Sally Lunn,
Or dissects the lucky pheasant - that, I think, were passing pleasant;
 As I sit alone at present, dreaming darkly of a Dun.
	

