---
author: Charles Stuart Calverley 
title: The Palace.
---

They come, they come, with fife and drum,
 And gleaming pikes and glancing banners:
Though the eyes flash, the lips are dumb;
 To talk in rank would not be manners.
Onward they stride, as Britons can;
The ladies following in the Van.

Who, who be these that tramp in threes
 Through sumptuous Piccadilly, through
The roaring Strand, and stand at ease
 At last 'neath shadowy Waterloo?
Some gallant Guild, I ween, are they;
Taking their annual holiday.

To catch the destin'd train - to pay
 Their willing fares, and plunge within it -
Is, as in old Romaunt they say,
 With them the work of half-a-minute.
Then off they're whirl'd, with songs and shouting,
To cedared Sydenham for their outing.

I mark'd them light, with faces bright
 As pansies or a new coin'd florin,
And up the sunless stair take flight,
 Close-pack'd as rabbits in a warren.
Honour the Brave, who in that stress
Still trod not upon Beauty's dress!

Kerchief in hand I saw them stand;
 In every kerchief lurk'd a lunch;
When they unfurl'd them, it was grand
 To watch bronzed men and maidens crunch
The sounding celery-stick, or ram
The knife into the blushing ham.

Dash'd the bold fork through pies of pork;
 O'er hard-boil'd eggs the saltspoon shook;
Leapt from its lair the playful cork:
 Yet some there were, to whom the brook
Seem'd sweetest beverage, and for meat
They chose the red root of the beet.

Then many a song, some rather long,
 Came quivering up from girlish throats;
And one young man he came out strong,
 And gave "The Wolf" without his notes.
While they who knew not song or ballad
Still munch'd, approvingly, their salad.

But ah! what bard could sing how hard,
 The artless banquet o'er, they ran
Down the soft slope with daisies starr'd
 And kingcups! onward, maid with man,
They flew, to scale the breezy swing,
Or court frank kisses in the ring.

Such are the sylvan scenes that thrill
 This heart! The lawns, the happy shade,
Where matrons, whom the sunbeams grill,
 Stir with slow spoon their lemonade;
And maidens flirt (no extra charge)
In comfort at the fountain's marge!

Others may praise the "grand displays"
 Where "fiery arch," "cascade," and "comet,"
Set the whole garden in a "blaze"!
 Far, at such times, may I be from it;
Though then the public may be "lost
In wonder" at a trifling cost.

Fann'd by the breeze, to puff at ease
 My faithful pipe is all I crave:
And if folks rave about the "trees
 Lit up by fireworks," let them rave.
Your monster fetes, I like not these;
Though they bring grist to the lessees.

