---
author: Ella Wheeler Wilcox 
title: The Superwoman
---

What will the superwoman be, of whom we sing - 
 She who is coming over the dim border
 Of Far To-morrow, after earth's disorder
Is tidied up by Time?What will she bring
 To make life better on tempestuous earth?
 How will her worth
Be greater than her forbears?What new power
Within her being will burst into flower?

She will bring beauty, not the transient dower
 Of adolescence which departs with youth - 
 But beauty based on knowledge of the truth
Of its eternal message and the source
Of all its potent force.
 Her outer being by the inner thought
 Shall into lasting loveliness be wrought.

She will bring virtue; but it will not be
The pale, white blossom of cold chastity
 Which hides a barren heart.She will be human - 
 Not saint or angel, but the superwoman - 
Mother and mate and friend of superman.

She will bring strength to aid the larger Plan,
 Wisdom and strength and sweetness all combined,
 Drawn from the Cosmic Mind - 
Wisdom to act, strength to attain,
And sweetness that finds growth in joy or pain.

She will bring that large virtue, self-control,
 And cherish it as her supremest treasure.
 Not at the call of sense or for man's pleasure
Will she invite from space an embryo soul,
 To live on earth again in mortal fashion,
 Unless love stirs her with divinest passion.

To motherhood she will bring common sense - 
 That most uncommon virtue.She will give
Love that is more than she-wolf violence
 (Which slaughters others that its own may live).

Love that will help each little tendril mind
 To grow and climb;
 Love that will know the lordliest use of Time
In training human egos to be kind.

She will be formed to guide, but not to lead - 
 Leaders are ever lonely - and her sphere
Will be that of the comrade and the mate,
 Loved, loving, and with insight fine and clear,
Which casts its searchlight on the course of fate,
And to the leaders says, 'Proceed' or 'Wait.'

And best of all, she will bring holy faith
To penetrate the shadowy world of death,
 And show the road beyond it, bright and broad,
 That leads straight up to God.

