---
author: Francis William Lauderdale Adams 
title: One Among So Many.
---

 . . . In a dark street she met and spoke to me,
 Importuning, one wet and mild March night.
 We walked and talked together. O her tale
 Was very common; thousands know it all!
 Seduced; a gentleman; a baby coming;
 Parents that railed; London; the child born dead;
 A seamstress then, one of some fifty girls
 "Taken on" a few months at a dressmaker's
 In the crush of the "season;" thirteen shillings a week!
 The fashionable people's dresses done,
 And they flown off, these fifty extra girls
 Sent - to the streets: that is, to work that gives
 Scarcely enough to buy the decent clothes
 Respectable employers all demand
 Or speak dismissal. Well, well, well, we know!
 And she - "Why, I have gone on down and down,
 And there's the gutter, look, that I shall die in!"
 "My dear," I say, "where hope of all but that
 Is gone, 'tis time, I think, life were gone too."
 She looks at me. "That I should kill myself?" - 
 "That you should kill yourself." - "That would be sin,
 And God would punish me!" - "And will not God
 Punish for this?" She pauses: then whispers:
 "No, no, He will forgive me, for He knows!"
 I laughed aloud: "And you," she said, "and you,
 Who are so good, so noble" . . . "Noble? Good?"
 I laughed aloud, the great sob in my throat.
 O my poor darling, O my little lost sheep
 Of this vast flock that perishes alone
 Out in the pitiless desert! - Yet she'd speak:
 She'd ask me: she'd entreat: she'd demonstrate.
 O I must not say that! I must believe!
 Who made the sea, the leaves so green, the sky
 So big and blue and pure above it all?
 O my poor darling, O my little lost sheep,
 Entreat no more and demonstrate no more;
 For I believe there is a God, a God
 Not in the heaven, the earth, or the waters; no,
 But in the heart of man, on the dear lips
 Of angel women, of heroic men!
 O hopeless wanderer that would not stay,
 ("It is too late, I cannot rise again!")
 O saint of faith in love behind the veils,
 ("You must believe in God, for you are good!"),
 O sister who made holy with your kiss,
 Your kiss in that wet dark mild night of March
 There in the hideous infamous London streets
 My cheek, and made my soul a sacred place,
 O my poor darling, O my little lost sheep!
