---
author: Frank Sidgwick 
title: The Bailiff's Daughter of Islington
---

The Text is formed by a collation of six broadsides printed between 1672 and 1700: they do not, however, present many variations. Here, if anywhere, one would demand licence to make alterations and improvements. In stanza 12 the rhymes are almost certainly misplaced; and the last stanza is quite superfluous. It would be much more in keeping with ballad-style to end with the twelfth, and many of the variants now sung conclude thus. This ballad is still extremely popular, and not only has it been included in many selections and song-books, but it is also still in oral tradition.


The Story is simple and pre-eminently in the popular vein. Counterparts exist elsewhere in the languages derived from Latin, and in Romaic.


THE BAILIFF'S DAUGHTER OF ISLINGTON

1.
There was a youth, and a well-belov'd youth,
And he was a squire's son,
He loved the bailiff's daughter dear,
That lived in Islington.

2.
She was coy, and she would not believe
That he did love her so,
No, nor at any time she would
Any countenance to him show.

3.
But when his friends did understand
His fond and foolish mind,
They sent him up to fair London,
An apprentice for to bind.

4.
And when he had been seven long years,
And his love he had not seen,
'Many a tear have I shed for her sake
When she little thought of me.'

5.
All the maids of Islington
Went forth to sport and play;
All but the bailiff's daughter dear;
She secretly stole away.

6.
She put off her gown of gray,
And put on her puggish attire;
She's up to fair London gone,
Her true-love to require.

7.
As she went along the road,
The weather being hot and dry,
There was she aware of her true-love,
At length came riding by.

8.
She stept to him, as red as any rose,
And took him by the bridle-ring:
'I pray you, kind sir, give me one penny,
To ease my weary limb.'

9.
'I prithee, sweetheart, canst thou tell me
Where that thou wast born?'
'At Islington, kind sir,' said she,
'Where I have had many a scorn.'

10.
'I prithee, sweetheart, canst thou tell me
Whether thou dost know
The bailiff's daughter of Islington?'
'She's dead, sir, long ago.'

11.
'Then I will sell my goodly steed,
My saddle and my bow;
I will into some far country,
Where no man doth me know.'

12.
'O stay, O stay, thou goodly youth!
She's alive, she is not dead;
Here she standeth by thy side,
And is ready to be thy bride.'

13.
'O farewell grief, and welcome joy,
Ten thousand times and more!
For now I have seen my own true love,
That I thought I should have seen no more.'
