---
author: George Gordon Byron 
title: Don Juan - Canto The Eighth.
---

 O blood and thunder! and oh blood and wounds!
 These are but vulgar oaths, as you may deem,
 Too gentle reader! and most shocking sounds:
 And so they are; yet thus is Glory's dream
 Unriddled, and as my true Muse expounds
 At present such things, since they are her theme,
 So be they her inspirers! Call them Mars,
 Bellona, what you will - they mean but wars.

 All was prepared - the fire, the sword, the men
 To wield them in their terrible array.
 The army, like a lion from his den,
 March'd forth with nerve and sinews bent to slay, -
 A human Hydra, issuing from its fen
 To breathe destruction on its winding way,
 Whose heads were heroes, which cut off in vain
 Immediately in others grew again.

 History can only take things in the gross;
 But could we know them in detail, perchance
 In balancing the profit and the loss,
 War's merit it by no means might enhance,
 To waste so much gold for a little dross,
 As hath been done, mere conquest to advance.
 The drying up a single tear has more
 Of honest fame, than shedding seas of gore.

 And why? - because it brings self-approbation;
 Whereas the other, after all its glare,
 Shouts, bridges, arches, pensions from a nation,
 Which (it may be) has not much left to spare,
 A higher title, or a loftier station,
 Though they may make Corruption gape or stare,
 Yet, in the end, except in Freedom's battles,
 Are nothing but a child of Murder's rattles.

 And such they are - and such they will be found:
 Not so Leonidas and Washington,
 Whose every battle-field is holy ground,
 Which breathes of nations saved, not worlds undone.
 How sweetly on the ear such echoes sound!
 While the mere victor's may appal or stun
 The servile and the vain, such names will be
 A watchword till the future shall be free.

 The night was dark, and the thick mist allow'd
 Nought to be seen save the artillery's flame,
 Which arch'd the horizon like a fiery cloud,
 And in the Danube's waters shone the same -
 A mirror'd hell! the volleying roar, and loud
 Long booming of each peal on peal, o'ercame
 The ear far more than thunder; for Heaven's flashes
 Spare, or smite rarely - man's make millions ashes!

 The column order'd on the assault scarce pass'd
 Beyond the Russian batteries a few toises,
 When up the bristling Moslem rose at last,
 Answering the Christian thunders with like voices:
 Then one vast fire, air, earth, and stream embraced,
 Which rock'd as 't were beneath the mighty noises;
 While the whole rampart blazed like Etna, when
 The restless Titan hiccups in his den.

 And one enormous shout of 'Allah!' rose
 In the same moment, loud as even the roar
 Of war's most mortal engines, to their foes
 Hurling defiance: city, stream, and shore
 Resounded 'Allah!' and the clouds which close
 With thick'ning canopy the conflict o'er,
 Vibrate to the Eternal name. Hark! through
 All sounds it pierceth 'Allah! Allah! Hu!'

 The columns were in movement one and all,
 But of the portion which attack'd by water,
 Thicker than leaves the lives began to fall,
 Though led by Arseniew, that great son of slaughter,
 As brave as ever faced both bomb and ball.
 'Carnage' (so Wordsworth tells you) 'is God's daughter:'
 If he speak truth, she is Christ's sister, and
 Just now behaved as in the Holy Land.

 The Prince de Ligne was wounded in the knee;
 Count Chapeau-Bras, too, had a ball between
 His cap and head, which proves the head to be
 Aristocratic as was ever seen,
 Because it then received no injury
 More than the cap; in fact, the ball could mean
 No harm unto a right legitimate head:
 'Ashes to ashes' - why not lead to lead?

 Also the General Markow, Brigadier,
 Insisting on removal of the prince
 Amidst some groaning thousands dying near, -
 All common fellows, who might writhe and wince,
 And shriek for water into a deaf ear, -
 The General Markow, who could thus evince
 His sympathy for rank, by the same token,
 To teach him greater, had his own leg broken.

 Three hundred cannon threw up their emetic,
 And thirty thousand muskets flung their pills
 Like hail, to make a bloody diuretic.
 Mortality! thou hast thy monthly bills;
 Thy plagues, thy famines, thy physicians, yet tick,
 Like the death-watch, within our ears the ills
 Past, present, and to come; - but all may yield
 To the true portrait of one battle-field.

 There the still varying pangs, which multiply
 Until their very number makes men hard
 By the infinities of agony,
 Which meet the gaze whate'er it may regard -
 The groan, the roll in dust, the all-white eye
 Turn'd back within its socket, - these reward
 Your rank and file by thousands, while the rest
 May win perhaps a riband at the breast!

 Yet I love glory; - glory 's a great thing: -
 Think what it is to be in your old age
 Maintain'd at the expense of your good king:
 A moderate pension shakes full many a sage,
 And heroes are but made for bards to sing,
 Which is still better; thus in verse to wage
 Your wars eternally, besides enjoying
 Half-pay for life, make mankind worth destroying.

 The troops, already disembark'd, push'd on
 To take a battery on the right; the others,
 Who landed lower down, their landing done,
 Had set to work as briskly as their brothers:
 Being grenadiers, they mounted one by one,
 Cheerful as children climb the breasts of mothers,
 O'er the entrenchment and the palisade,
 Quite orderly, as if upon parade.

 And this was admirable; for so hot
 The fire was, that were red Vesuvius loaded,
 Besides its lava, with all sorts of shot
 And shells or hells, it could not more have goaded.
 Of officers a third fell on the spot,
 A thing which victory by no means boded
 To gentlemen engaged in the assault:
 Hounds, when the huntsman tumbles, are at fault.

 But here I leave the general concern,
 To track our hero on his path of fame:
 He must his laurels separately earn;
 For fifty thousand heroes, name by name,
 Though all deserving equally to turn
 A couplet, or an elegy to claim,
 Would form a lengthy lexicon of glory,
 And what is worse still, a much longer story:

 And therefore we must give the greater number
 To the Gazette - which doubtless fairly dealt
 By the deceased, who lie in famous slumber
 In ditches, fields, or wheresoe'er they felt
 Their clay for the last time their souls encumber; -
 Thrice happy he whose name has been well spelt
 In the despatch: I knew a man whose loss
 Was printed Grove, although his name was Grose.

 Juan and Johnson join'd a certain corps,
 And fought away with might and main, not knowing
 The way which they had never trod before,
 And still less guessing where they might be going;
 But on they march'd, dead bodies trampling o'er,
 Firing, and thrusting, slashing, sweating, glowing,
 But fighting thoughtlessly enough to win,
 To their two selves, one whole bright bulletin.

 Thus on they wallow'd in the bloody mire
 Of dead and dying thousands, - sometimes gaining
 A yard or two of ground, which brought them nigher
 To some odd angle for which all were straining;
 At other times, repulsed by the close fire,
 Which really pour'd as if all hell were raining
 Instead of heaven, they stumbled backwards o'er
 A wounded comrade, sprawling in his gore.

 Though 't was Don Juan's first of fields, and though
 The nightly muster and the silent march
 In the chill dark, when courage does not glow
 So much as under a triumphal arch,
 Perhaps might make him shiver, yawn, or throw
 A glance on the dull clouds (as thick as starch,
 Which stiffen'd heaven) as if he wish'd for day; -
 Yet for all this he did not run away.

 Indeed he could not. But what if he had?
 There have been and are heroes who begun
 With something not much better, or as bad:
 Frederic the Great from Molwitz deign'd to run,
 For the first and last time; for, like a pad,
 Or hawk, or bride, most mortals after one
 Warm bout are broken into their new tricks,
 And fight like fiends for pay or politics.

 He was what Erin calls, in her sublime
 Old Erse or Irish, or it may be Punic
 (The antiquarians who can settle time,
 Which settles all things, Roman, Greek, or Runic,
 Swear that Pat's language sprung from the same clime
 With Hannibal, and wears the Tyrian tunic
 Of Dido's alphabet; and this is rational
 As any other notion, and not national); -

 But Juan was quite 'a broth of a boy,'
 A thing of impulse and a child of song;
 Now swimming in the sentiment of joy,
 Or the sensation (if that phrase seem wrong),
 And afterward, if he must needs destroy,
 In such good company as always throng
 To battles, sieges, and that kind of pleasure,
 No less delighted to employ his leisure;

 But always without malice: if he warr'd
 Or loved, it was with what we call 'the best
 Intentions,' which form all mankind's trump card,
 To be produced when brought up to the test.
 The statesman, hero, harlot, lawyer - ward
 Off each attack, when people are in quest
 Of their designs, by saying they meant well;
 'T is pity 'that such meaning should pave hell.'

 I almost lately have begun to doubt
 Whether hell's pavement - if it be so paved -
 Must not have latterly been quite worn out,
 Not by the numbers good intent hath saved,
 But by the mass who go below without
 Those ancient good intentions, which once shaved
 And smooth'd the brimstone of that street of hell
 Which bears the greatest likeness to Pall Mall.

 Juan, by some strange chance, which oft divides
 Warrior from warrior in their grim career,
 Like chastest wives from constant husbands' sides
 Just at the close of the first bridal year,
 By one of those odd turns of Fortune's tides,
 Was on a sudden rather puzzled here,
 When, after a good deal of heavy firing,
 He found himself alone, and friends retiring.

 I don't know how the thing occurr'd - it might
 Be that the greater part were kill'd or wounded,
 And that the rest had faced unto the right
 About; a circumstance which has confounded
 Caesar himself, who, in the very sight
 Of his whole army, which so much abounded
 In courage, was obliged to snatch a shield,
 And rally back his Romans to the field.

 Juan, who had no shield to snatch, and was
 No Caesar, but a fine young lad, who fought
 He knew not why, arriving at this pass,
 Stopp'd for a minute, as perhaps he ought
 For a much longer time; then, like an as
 (Start not, kind reader; since great Homer thought
 This simile enough for Ajax, Juan
 Perhaps may find it better than a new one) -

 Then, like an ass, he went upon his way,
 And, what was stranger, never look'd behind;
 But seeing, flashing forward, like the day
 Over the hills, a fire enough to blind
 Those who dislike to look upon a fray,
 He stumbled on, to try if he could find
 A path, to add his own slight arm and forces
 To corps, the greater part of which were corses.

 Perceiving then no more the commandant
 Of his own corps, nor even the corps, which had
 Quite disappear'd - the gods know howl (I can't
 Account for every thing which may look bad
 In history; but we at least may grant
 It was not marvellous that a mere lad,
 In search of glory, should look on before,
 Nor care a pinch of snuff about his corps): -

 Perceiving nor commander nor commanded,
 And left at large, like a young heir, to make
 His way to - where he knew not - single handed;
 As travellers follow over bog and brake
 An 'ignis fatuus;' or as sailors stranded
 Unto the nearest hut themselves betake;
 So Juan, following honour and his nose,
 Rush'd where the thickest fire announced most foes.

 He knew not where he was, nor greatly cared,
 For he was dizzy, busy, and his veins
 Fill'd as with lightning - for his spirit shared
 The hour, as is the case with lively brains;
 And where the hottest fire was seen and heard,
 And the loud cannon peal'd his hoarsest strains,
 He rush'd, while earth and air were sadly shaken
 By thy humane discovery, Friar Bacon!

 And as he rush'd along, it came to pass he
 Fell in with what was late the second column,
 Under the orders of the General Lascy,
 But now reduced, as is a bulky volume
 Into an elegant extract (much less massy)
 Of heroism, and took his place with solemn
 Air 'midst the rest, who kept their valiant faces
 And levell'd weapons still against the glacis.

 Just at this crisis up came Johnson too,
 Who had 'retreated,' as the phrase is when
 Men run away much rather than go through
 Destruction's jaws into the devil's den;
 But Johnson was a clever fellow, who
 Knew when and how 'to cut and come again,'
 And never ran away, except when running
 Was nothing but a valorous kind of cunning.

 And so, when all his corps were dead or dying,
 Except Don Juan, a mere novice, whose
 More virgin valour never dreamt of flying
 From ignorance of danger, which indues
 Its votaries, like innocence relying
 On its own strength, with careless nerves and thews, -
 Johnson retired a little, just to rally
 Those who catch cold in 'shadows of Death's valley.'

 And there, a little shelter'd from the shot,
 Which rain'd from bastion, battery, parapet,
 Rampart, wall, casement, house, - for there was not
 In this extensive city, sore beset
 By Christian soldiery, a single spot
 Which did not combat like the devil, as yet,
 He found a number of Chasseurs, all scatter'd
 By the resistance of the chase they batter'd.

 And these he call'd on; and, what 's strange, they came
 Unto his call, unlike 'the spirits from
 The vasty deep,' to whom you may exclaim,
 Says Hotspur, long ere they will leave their home.
 Their reasons were uncertainty, or shame
 At shrinking from a bullet or a bomb,
 And that odd impulse, which in wars or creeds
 Makes men, like cattle, follow him who leads.

 By Jove! he was a noble fellow, Johnson,
 And though his name, than Ajax or Achilles,
 Sounds less harmonious, underneath the sun soon
 We shall not see his likeness: he could kill his
 Man quite as quietly as blows the monsoon
 Her steady breath (which some months the same still is):
 Seldom he varied feature, hue, or muscle,
 And could be very busy without bustle;

 And therefore, when he ran away, he did so
 Upon reflection, knowing that behind
 He would find others who would fain be rid so
 Of idle apprehensions, which like wind
 Trouble heroic stomachs. Though their lids so
 Oft are soon closed, all heroes are not blind,
 But when they light upon immediate death,
 Retire a little, merely to take breath.

 But Johnson only ran off, to return
 With many other warriors, as we said,
 Unto that rather somewhat misty bourn,
 Which Hamlet tells us is a pass of dread.
 To Jack howe'er this gave but slight concern:
 His soul (like galvanism upon the dead)
 Acted upon the living as on wire,
 And led them back into the heaviest fire.

 Egad! they found the second time what they
 The first time thought quite terrible enough
 To fly from, malgre all which people say
 Of glory, and all that immortal stuff
 Which fills a regiment (besides their pay,
 That daily shilling which makes warriors tough) -
 They found on their return the self-same welcome,
 Which made some think, and others know, a hell come.

 They fell as thick as harvests beneath hail,
 Grass before scythes, or corn below the sickle,
 Proving that trite old truth, that life 's as frail
 As any other boon for which men stickle.
 The Turkish batteries thrash'd them like a flail,
 Or a good boxer, into a sad pickle
 Putting the very bravest, who were knock'd
 Upon the head, before their guns were cock'd.

 The Turks, behind the traverses and flanks
 Of the next bastion, fired away like devils,
 And swept, as gales sweep foam away, whole ranks:
 However, Heaven knows how, the Fate who levels
 Towns, nations, worlds, in her revolving pranks,
 So order'd it, amidst these sulphury revels,
 That Johnson and some few who had not scamper'd,
 Reach'd the interior talus of the rampart.

 First one or two, then five, six, and a dozen,
 Came mounting quickly up, for it was now
 All neck or nothing, as, like pitch or rosin,
 Flame was shower'd forth above, as well 's below,
 So that you scarce could say who best had chosen,
 The gentlemen that were the first to show
 Their martial faces on the parapet,
 Or those who thought it brave to wait as yet.

 But those who scaled, found out that their advance
 Was favour'd by an accident or blunder:
 The Greek or Turkish Cohorn's ignorance
 Had palisado'd in a way you 'd wonder
 To see in forts of Netherlands or France
 (Though these to our Gibraltar must knock under) -
 Right in the middle of the parapet
 Just named, these palisades were primly set:

 So that on either side some nine or ten
 Paces were left, whereon you could contrive
 To march; a great convenience to our men,
 At least to all those who were left alive,
 Who thus could form a line and fight again;
 And that which farther aided them to strive
 Was, that they could kick down the palisades,
 Which scarcely rose much higher than grass blades.

 Among the first, - I will not say the first,
 For such precedence upon such occasions
 Will oftentimes make deadly quarrels burst
 Out between friends as well as allied nations:
 The Briton must be bold who really durst
 Put to such trial John Bull's partial patience,
 As say that Wellington at Waterloo
 Was beaten - though the Prussians say so too; -

 And that if Blucher, Bulow, Gneisenau,
 And God knows who besides in 'au' and 'ow,'
 Had not come up in time to cast an awe
 Into the hearts of those who fought till now
 As tigers combat with an empty craw,
 The Duke of Wellington had ceased to show
 His orders, also to receive his pensions,
 Which are the heaviest that our history mentions.

 But never mind; - 'God save the king!' and kings!
 For if he don't, I doubt if men will longer -
 I think I hear a little bird, who sings
 The people by and by will be the stronger:
 The veriest jade will wince whose harness wrings
 So much into the raw as quite to wrong her
 Beyond the rules of posting, - and the mob
 At last fall sick of imitating Job.

 At first it grumbles, then it swears, and then,
 Like David, flings smooth pebbles 'gainst a giant;
 At last it takes to weapons such as men
 Snatch when despair makes human hearts less pliant.
 Then comes 'the tug of war;' - 't will come again,
 I rather doubt; and I would fain say 'fie on 't,'
 If I had not perceived that revolution
 Alone can save the earth from hell's pollution.

 But to continue: - I say not the first,
 But of the first, our little friend Don Juan
 Walk'd o'er the walls of Ismail, as if nursed
 Amidst such scenes - though this was quite a new one
 To him, and I should hope to most. The thirst
 Of glory, which so pierces through and through one,
 Pervaded him - although a generous creature,
 As warm in heart as feminine in feature.

 And here he was - who upon woman's breast,
 Even from a child, felt like a child; howe'er
 The man in all the rest might be confest,
 To him it was Elysium to be there;
 And he could even withstand that awkward test
 Which Rousseau points out to the dubious fair,
 'Observe your lover when he leaves your arms;'
 But Juan never left them, while they had charms,

 Unless compell'd by fate, or wave, or wind,
 Or near relations, who are much the same.
 But here he was! - where each tie that can bind
 Humanity must yield to steel and flame:
 And he whose very body was all mind,
 Flung here by fate or circumstance, which tame
 The loftiest, hurried by the time and place,
 Dash'd on like a spurr'd blood-horse in a race.

 So was his blood stirr'd while he found resistance,
 As is the hunter's at the five-bar gate,
 Or double post and rail, where the existence
 Of Britain's youth depends upon their weight,
 The lightest being the safest: at a distance
 He hated cruelty, as all men hate
 Blood, until heated - and even then his own
 At times would curdle o'er some heavy groan.

 The General Lascy, who had been hard press'd,
 Seeing arrive an aid so opportune
 As were some hundred youngsters all abreast,
 Who came as if just dropp'd down from the moon,
 To Juan, who was nearest him, address'd
 His thanks, and hopes to take the city soon,
 Not reckoning him to be a 'base Bezonian'
 (As Pistol calls it), but a young Livonian.

 Juan, to whom he spoke in German, knew
 As much of German as of Sanscrit, and
 In answer made an inclination to
 The general who held him in command;
 For seeing one with ribands, black and blue,
 Stars, medals, and a bloody sword in hand,
 Addressing him in tones which seem'd to thank,
 He recognised an officer of rank.

 Short speeches pass between two men who speak
 No common language; and besides, in time
 Of war and taking towns, when many a shriek
 Rings o'er the dialogue, and many a crime
 Is perpetrated ere a word can break
 Upon the ear, and sounds of horror chime
 In like church-bells, with sigh, howl, groan, yell, prayer,
 There cannot be much conversation there.

 And therefore all we have related in
 Two long octaves, pass'd in a little minute;
 But in the same small minute, every sin
 Contrived to get itself comprised within it.
 The very cannon, deafen'd by the din,
 Grew dumb, for you might almost hear a linnet,
 As soon as thunder, 'midst the general noise
 Of human nature's agonising voice!

 The town was enter'd. Oh eternity!-
 'God made the country and man made the town,'
 So Cowper says - and I begin to be
 Of his opinion, when I see cast down
 Rome, Babylon, Tyre, Carthage, Nineveh,
 All walls men know, and many never known;
 And pondering on the present and the past,
 To deem the woods shall be our home at last

 Of all men, saving Sylla the man-slayer,
 Who passes for in life and death most lucky,
 Of the great names which in our faces stare,
 The General Boon, back-woodsman of Kentucky,
 Was happiest amongst mortals anywhere;
 For killing nothing but a bear or buck, he
 Enjoy'd the lonely, vigorous, harmless days
 Of his old age in wilds of deepest maze.

 Crime came not near him - she is not the child
 Of solitude; Health shrank not from him - for
 Her home is in the rarely trodden wild,
 Where if men seek her not, and death be more
 Their choice than life, forgive them, as beguiled
 By habit to what their own hearts abhor -
 In cities caged. The present case in point I
 Cite is, that Boon lived hunting up to ninety;

 And what 's still stranger, left behind a name
 For which men vainly decimate the throng,
 Not only famous, but of that good fame,
 Without which glory 's but a tavern song -
 Simple, serene, the antipodes of shame,
 Which hate nor envy e'er could tinge with wrong;
 An active hermit, even in age the child
 Of Nature, or the man of Ross run wild.

 'T is true he shrank from men even of his nation,
 When they built up unto his darling trees, -
 He moved some hundred miles off, for a station
 Where there were fewer houses and more ease;
 The inconvenience of civilisation
 Is, that you neither can be pleased nor please;
 But where he met the individual man,
 He show'd himself as kind as mortal can.

 He was not all alone: around him grew
 A sylvan tribe of children of the chase,
 Whose young, unwaken'd world was ever new,
 Nor sword nor sorrow yet had left a trace
 On her unwrinkled brow, nor could you view
 A frown on Nature's or on human face;
 The free-born forest found and kept them free,
 And fresh as is a torrent or a tree.

 And tall, and strong, and swift of foot were they,
 Beyond the dwarfing city's pale abortions,
 Because their thoughts had never been the prey
 Of care or gain: the green woods were their portions;
 No sinking spirits told them they grew grey,
 No fashion made them apes of her distortions;
 Simple they were, not savage; and their rifles,
 Though very true, were not yet used for trifles.

 Motion was in their days, rest in their slumbers,
 And cheerfulness the handmaid of their toil;
 Nor yet too many nor too few their numbers;
 Corruption could not make their hearts her soil;
 The lust which stings, the splendour which encumbers,
 With the free foresters divide no spoil;
 Serene, not sullen, were the solitudes
 Of this unsighing people of the woods.

 So much for Nature: - by way of variety,
 Now back to thy great joys, Civilisation!
 And the sweet consequence of large society,
 War, pestilence, the despot's desolation,
 The kingly scourge, the lust of notoriety,
 The millions slain by soldiers for their ration,
 The scenes like Catherine's boudoir at threescore,
 With Ismail's storm to soften it the more.

 The town was enter'd: first one column made
 Its sanguinary way good - then another;
 The reeking bayonet and the flashing blade
 Clash'd 'gainst the scimitar, and babe and mother
 With distant shrieks were heard Heaven to upbraid:
 Still closer sulphury clouds began to smother
 The breath of morn and man, where foot by foot
 The madden'd Turks their city still dispute.

 Koutousow, he who afterward beat back
 (With some assistance from the frost and snow)
 Napoleon on his bold and bloody track,
 It happen'd was himself beat back just now;
 He was a jolly fellow, and could crack
 His jest alike in face of friend or foe,
 Though life, and death, and victory were at stake;
 But here it seem'd his jokes had ceased to take:

 For having thrown himself into a ditch,
 Follow'd in haste by various grenadiers,
 Whose blood the puddle greatly did enrich,
 He climb'd to where the parapet appears;
 But there his project reach'd its utmost pitch
 ('Mongst other deaths the General Ribaupierre's
 Was much regretted), for the Moslem men
 Threw them all down into the ditch again.

 And had it not been for some stray troops landing
 They knew not where, being carried by the stream
 To some spot, where they lost their understanding,
 And wander'd up and down as in a dream,
 Until they reach'd, as daybreak was expanding,
 That which a portal to their eyes did seem, -
 The great and gay Koutousow might have lain
 Where three parts of his column yet remain.

 And scrambling round the rampart, these same troops,
 After the taking of the 'Cavalier,'
 Just as Koutousow's most 'forlorn' of 'hopes'
 Took like chameleons some slight tinge of fear,
 Open'd the gate call'd 'Kilia,' to the groups
 Of baffled heroes, who stood shyly near,
 Sliding knee-deep in lately frozen mud,
 Now thaw'd into a marsh of human blood.

 The Kozacks, or, if so you please, Cossacques
 (I don't much pique myself upon orthography,
 So that I do not grossly err in facts,
 Statistics, tactics, politics, and geography) -
 Having been used to serve on horses' backs,
 And no great dilettanti in topography
 Of fortresses, but fighting where it pleases
 Their chiefs to order, - were all cut to pieces.

 Their column, though the Turkish batteries thunder'd
 Upon them, ne'ertheless had reach'd the rampart,
 And naturally thought they could have plunder'd
 The city, without being farther hamper'd;
 But as it happens to brave men, they blunder'd -
 The Turks at first pretended to have scamper'd,
 Only to draw them 'twixt two bastion corners,
 From whence they sallied on those Christian scorners.

 Then being taken by the tail - a taking
 Fatal to bishops as to soldiers - these
 Cossacques were all cut off as day was breaking,
 And found their lives were let at a short lease -
 But perish'd without shivering or shaking,
 Leaving as ladders their heap'd carcasses,
 O'er which Lieutenant-Colonel Yesouskoi
 March'd with the brave battalion of Polouzki: -

 This valiant man kill'd all the Turks he met,
 But could not eat them, being in his turn
 Slain by some Mussulmans, who would not yet,
 Without resistance, see their city burn.
 The walls were won, but 't was an even bet
 Which of the armies would have cause to mourn:
 'T was blow for blow, disputing inch by inch,
 For one would not retreat, nor t' other flinch.

 Another column also suffer'd much: -
 And here we may remark with the historian,
 You should but give few cartridges to such
 Troops as are meant to march with greatest glory on:
 When matters must be carried by the touch
 Of the bright bayonet, and they all should hurry on,
 They sometimes, with a hankering for existence,
 Keep merely firing at a foolish distance.

 A junction of the General Meknop's men
 (Without the General, who had fallen some time
 Before, being badly seconded just then)
 Was made at length with those who dared to climb
 The death-disgorging rampart once again;
 And though the Turk's resistance was sublime,
 They took the bastion, which the Seraskier
 Defended at a price extremely dear.

 Juan and Johnson, and some volunteers,
 Among the foremost, offer'd him good quarter,
 A word which little suits with Seraskiers,
 Or at least suited not this valiant Tartar.
 He died, deserving well his country's tears,
 A savage sort of military martyr.
 An English naval officer, who wish'd
 To make him prisoner, was also dish'd:

 For all the answer to his proposition
 Was from a pistol-shot that laid him dead;
 On which the rest, without more intermission,
 Began to lay about with steel and lead -
 The pious metals most in requisition
 On such occasions: not a single head
 Was spared; - three thousand Moslems perish'd here,
 And sixteen bayonets pierced the Seraskier.

 The city 's taken - only part by part -
 And death is drunk with gore: there 's not a street
 Where fights not to the last some desperate heart
 For those for whom it soon shall cease to beat.
 Here War forgot his own destructive art
 In more destroying Nature; and the heat
 Of carnage, like the Nile's sun-sodden slime,
 Engender'd monstrous shapes of every crime.

 A Russian officer, in martial tread
 Over a heap of bodies, felt his heel
 Seized fast, as if 't were by the serpent's head
 Whose fangs Eve taught her human seed to feel:
 In vain he kick'd, and swore, and writhed, and bled,
 And howl'd for help as wolves do for a meal -
 The teeth still kept their gratifying hold,
 As do the subtle snakes described of old.

 A dying Moslem, who had felt the foot
 Of a foe o'er him, snatch'd at it, and bit
 The very tendon which is most acute
 (That which some ancient Muse or modern wit
 Named after thee, Achilles), and quite through 't
 He made the teeth meet, nor relinquish'd it
 Even with his life - for (but they lie) 't is said
 To the live leg still clung the sever'd head.

 However this may be, 't is pretty sure
 The Russian officer for life was lamed,
 For the Turk's teeth stuck faster than a skewer,
 And left him 'midst the invalid and maim'd:
 The regimental surgeon could not cure
 His patient, and perhaps was to be blamed
 More than the head of the inveterate foe,
 Which was cut off, and scarce even then let go.

 But then the fact 's a fact - and 't is the part
 Of a true poet to escape from fiction
 Whene'er he can; for there is little art
 In leaving verse more free from the restriction
 Of truth than prose, unless to suit the mart
 For what is sometimes called poetic diction,
 And that outrageous appetite for lies
 Which Satan angles with for souls, like flies.

 The city 's taken, but not render'd! - No!
 There 's not a Moslem that hath yielded sword:
 The blood may gush out, as the Danube's flow
 Rolls by the city wall; but deed nor word
 Acknowledge aught of dread of death or foe:
 In vain the yell of victory is roar'd
 By the advancing Muscovite - the groan
 Of the last foe is echoed by his own.

 The bayonet pierces and the sabre cleaves,
 And human lives are lavish'd everywhere,
 As the year closing whirls the scarlet leaves
 When the stripp'd forest bows to the bleak air,
 And groans; and thus the peopled city grieves,
 Shorn of its best and loveliest, and left bare;
 But still it falls in vast and awful splinters,
 As oaks blown down with all their thousand winters.

 It is an awful topic - but 't is not
 My cue for any time to be terrific:
 For checker'd as is seen our human lot
 With good, and bad, and worse, alike prolific
 Of melancholy merriment, to quote
 Too much of one sort would be soporific; -
 Without, or with, offence to friends or foes,
 I sketch your world exactly as it goes.

 And one good action in the midst of crimes
 Is 'quite refreshing,' in the affected phrase
 Of these ambrosial, Pharisaic times,
 With all their pretty milk-and-water ways,
 And may serve therefore to bedew these rhymes,
 A little scorch'd at present with the blaze
 Of conquest and its consequences, which
 Make epic poesy so rare and rich.

 Upon a taken bastion, where there lay
 Thousands of slaughter'd men, a yet warm group
 Of murder'd women, who had found their way
 To this vain refuge, made the good heart droop
 And shudder; - while, as beautiful as May,
 A female child of ten years tried to stoop
 And hide her little palpitating breast
 Amidst the bodies lull'd in bloody rest.

 Two villainous Cossacques pursued the child
 With flashing eyes and weapons: match'd with them,
 The rudest brute that roams Siberia's wild
 Has feelings pure and polish'd as a gem, -
 The bear is civilised, the wolf is mild;
 And whom for this at last must we condemn?
 Their natures? or their sovereigns, who employ
 All arts to teach their subjects to destroy?

 Their sabres glitter'd o'er her little head,
 Whence her fair hair rose twining with affright,
 Her hidden face was plunged amidst the dead:
 When Juan caught a glimpse of this sad sight,
 I shall not say exactly what he said,
 Because it might not solace 'ears polite;'
 But what he did, was to lay on their backs,
 The readiest way of reasoning with Cossacques.

 One's hip he slash'd, and split the other's shoulder,
 And drove them with their brutal yells to seek
 If there might be chirurgeons who could solder
 The wounds they richly merited, and shriek
 Their baffled rage and pain; while waxing colder
 As he turn'd o'er each pale and gory cheek,
 Don Juan raised his little captive from
 The heap a moment more had made her tomb.

 And she was chill as they, and on her face
 A slender streak of blood announced how near
 Her fate had been to that of all her race;
 For the same blow which laid her mother here
 Had scarr'd her brow, and left its crimson trace,
 As the last link with all she had held dear;
 But else unhurt, she open'd her large eyes,
 And gazed on Juan with a wild surprise.

 Just at this instant, while their eyes were fix'd
 Upon each other, with dilated glance,
 In Juan's look, pain, pleasure, hope, fear, mix'd
 With joy to save, and dread of some mischance
 Unto his protege; while hers, transfix'd
 With infant terrors, glared as from a trance,
 A pure, transparent, pale, yet radiant face,
 Like to a lighted alabaster vase; -

 Up came John Johnson (I will not say 'Jack,'
 For that were vulgar, cold, and commonplace
 On great occasions, such as an attack
 On cities, as hath been the present case):
 Up Johnson came, with hundreds at his back,
 Exclaiming; - 'Juan! Juan! On, boy! brace
 Your arm, and I 'll bet Moscow to a dollar
 That you and I will win St. George's collar.

 'The Seraskier is knock'd upon the head,
 But the stone bastion still remains, wherein
 The old Pacha sits among some hundreds dead,
 Smoking his pipe quite calmly 'midst the din
 Of our artillery and his own: 't is said
 Our kill'd, already piled up to the chin,
 Lie round the battery; but still it batters,
 And grape in volleys, like a vineyard, scatters.

 'Then up with me!' - But Juan answer'd, 'Look
 Upon this child - I saved her - must not leave
 Her life to chance; but point me out some nook
 Of safety, where she less may shrink and grieve,
 And I am with you.' - Whereon Johnson took
 A glance around - and shrugg'd - and twitch'd his sleeve
 And black silk neckcloth - and replied, 'You 're right;
 Poor thing! what 's to be done? I 'm puzzled quite.'

 Said Juan: 'Whatsoever is to be
 Done, I 'll not quit her till she seems secure
 Of present life a good deal more than we.'
 Quoth Johnson: 'Neither will I quite ensure;
 But at the least you may die gloriously.'
 Juan replied: 'At least I will endure
 Whate'er is to be borne - but not resign
 This child, who is parentless, and therefore mine.'

 Johnson said: 'Juan, we 've no time to lose;
 The child 's a pretty child - a very pretty -
 I never saw such eyes - but hark! now choose
 Between your fame and feelings, pride and pity; -
 Hark! how the roar increases! - no excuse
 Will serve when there is plunder in a city; -
 I should be loth to march without you, but,
 By God! we 'll be too late for the first cut.'

 But Juan was immovable; until
 Johnson, who really loved him in his way,
 Pick'd out amongst his followers with some skill
 Such as he thought the least given up to prey;
 And swearing if the infant came to ill
 That they should all be shot on the next day;
 But if she were deliver'd safe and sound,
 They should at least have fifty rubles round,

 And all allowances besides of plunder
 In fair proportion with their comrades; - then
 Juan consented to march on through thunder,
 Which thinn'd at every step their ranks of men:
 And yet the rest rush'd eagerly - no wonder,
 For they were heated by the hope of gain,
 A thing which happens everywhere each day -
 No hero trusteth wholly to half pay.

 And such is victory, and such is man!
 At least nine tenths of what we call so; - God
 May have another name for half we scan
 As human beings, or his ways are odd.
 But to our subject: a brave Tartar khan -
 Or 'sultan,' as the author (to whose nod
 In prose I bend my humble verse) doth call
 This chieftain - somehow would not yield at all:

 But flank'd by five brave sons (such is polygamy,
 That she spawns warriors by the score, where none
 Are prosecuted for that false crime bigamy),
 He never would believe the city won
 While courage clung but to a single twig. - Am I
 Describing Priam's, Peleus', or Jove's son?
 Neither - but a good, plain, old, temperate man,
 Who fought with his five children in the van.

 To take him was the point. The truly brave,
 When they behold the brave oppress'd with odds,
 Are touch'd with a desire to shield and save; -
 A mixture of wild beasts and demigods
 Are they - now furious as the sweeping wave,
 Now moved with pity: even as sometimes nods
 The rugged tree unto the summer wind,
 Compassion breathes along the savage mind.

 But he would not be taken, and replied
 To all the propositions of surrender
 By mowing Christians down on every side,
 As obstinate as Swedish Charles at Bender.
 His five brave boys no less the foe defied;
 Whereon the Russian pathos grew less tender,
 As being a virtue, like terrestrial patience,
 Apt to wear out on trifling provocations.

 And spite of Johnson and of Juan, who
 Expended all their Eastern phraseology
 In begging him, for God's sake, just to show
 So much less fight as might form an apology
 For them in saving such a desperate foe -
 He hew'd away, like doctors of theology
 When they dispute with sceptics; and with curses
 Struck at his friends, as babies beat their nurses.

 Nay, he had wounded, though but slightly, both
 Juan and Johnson; whereupon they fell,
 The first with sighs, the second with an oath,
 Upon his angry sultanship, pell-mell,
 And all around were grown exceeding wroth
 At such a pertinacious infidel,
 And pour'd upon him and his sons like rain,
 Which they resisted like a sandy plain

 That drinks and still is dry. At last they perish'd -
 His second son was levell'd by a shot;
 His third was sabred; and the fourth, most cherish'd
 Of all the five, on bayonets met his lot;
 The fifth, who, by a Christian mother nourish'd,
 Had been neglected, ill-used, and what not,
 Because deform'd, yet died all game and bottom,
 To save a sire who blush'd that he begot him.

 The eldest was a true and tameless Tartar,
 As great a scorner of the Nazarene
 As ever Mahomet pick'd out for a martyr,
 Who only saw the black-eyed girls in green,
 Who make the beds of those who won't take quarter
 On earth, in Paradise; and when once seen,
 Those houris, like all other pretty creatures,
 Do just whate'er they please, by dint of features.

 And what they pleased to do with the young khan
 In heaven I know not, nor pretend to guess;
 But doubtless they prefer a fine young man
 To tough old heroes, and can do no less;
 And that 's the cause no doubt why, if we scan
 A field of battle's ghastly wilderness,
 For one rough, weather-beaten, veteran body,
 You 'll find ten thousand handsome coxcombs bloody.

 Your houris also have a natural pleasure
 In lopping off your lately married men,
 Before the bridal hours have danced their measure
 And the sad, second moon grows dim again,
 Or dull repentance hath had dreary leisure
 To wish him back a bachelor now and then.
 And thus your houri (it may be) disputes
 Of these brief blossoms the immediate fruits.

 Thus the young khan, with houris in his sight,
 Thought not upon the charms of four young brides,
 But bravely rush'd on his first heavenly night.
 In short, howe'er our better faith derides,
 These black-eyed virgins make the Moslems fight,
 As though there were one heaven and none besides, -
 Whereas, if all be true we hear of heaven
 And hell, there must at least be six or seven.

 So fully flash'd the phantom on his eyes,
 That when the very lance was in his heart,
 He shouted 'Allah!' and saw Paradise
 With all its veil of mystery drawn apart,
 And bright eternity without disguise
 On his soul, like a ceaseless sunrise, dart: -
 With prophets, houris, angels, saints, descried
 In one voluptuous blaze, - and then he died,

 But with a heavenly rapture on his face.
 The good old khan, who long had ceased to see
 Houris, or aught except his florid race
 Who grew like cedars round him gloriously -
 When he beheld his latest hero grace
 The earth, which he became like a fell'd tree,
 Paused for a moment, from the fight, and cast
 A glance on that slain son, his first and last.

 The soldiers, who beheld him drop his point,
 Stopp'd as if once more willing to concede
 Quarter, in case he bade them not 'aroynt!'
 As he before had done. He did not heed
 Their pause nor signs: his heart was out of joint,
 And shook (till now unshaken) like a reed,
 As he look'd down upon his children gone,
 And felt - though done with life - he was alone

 But 't was a transient tremor; - with a spring
 Upon the Russian steel his breast he flung,
 As carelessly as hurls the moth her wing
 Against the light wherein she dies: he clung
 Closer, that all the deadlier they might wring,
 Unto the bayonets which had pierced his young;
 And throwing back a dim look on his sons,
 In one wide wound pour'd forth his soul at once.

 'T is strange enough - the rough, tough soldiers, who
 Spared neither sex nor age in their career
 Of carnage, when this old man was pierced through,
 And lay before them with his children near,
 Touch'd by the heroism of him they slew,
 Were melted for a moment: though no tear
 Flow'd from their bloodshot eyes, all red with strife,
 They honour'd such determined scorn of life.

 But the stone bastion still kept up its fire,
 Where the chief pacha calmly held his post:
 Some twenty times he made the Russ retire,
 And baffled the assaults of all their host;
 At length he condescended to inquire
 If yet the city's rest were won or lost;
 And being told the latter, sent a bey
 To answer Ribas' summons to give way.

 In the mean time, cross-legg'd, with great sang-froid,
 Among the scorching ruins he sat smoking
 Tobacco on a little carpet; - Troy
 Saw nothing like the scene around: - yet looking
 With martial stoicism, nought seem'd to annoy
 His stern philosophy; but gently stroking
 His beard, he puff'd his pipe's ambrosial gales,
 As if he had three lives, as well as tails.

 The town was taken - whether he might yield
 Himself or bastion, little matter'd now:
 His stubborn valour was no future shield.
 Ismail 's no more! The crescent's silver bow
 Sunk, and the crimson cross glared o'er the field,
 But red with no redeeming gore: the glow
 Of burning streets, like moonlight on the water,
 Was imaged back in blood, the sea of slaughter.

 All that the mind would shrink from of excesses;
 All that the body perpetrates of bad;
 All that we read, hear, dream, of man's distresses;
 All that the devil would do if run stark mad;
 All that defies the worst which pen expresses;
 All by which hell is peopled, or as sad
 As hell - mere mortals who their power abuse -
 Was here (as heretofore and since) let loose.

 If here and there some transient trait of pity
 Was shown, and some more noble heart broke through
 Its bloody bond, and saved perhaps some pretty
 Child, or an aged, helpless man or two -
 What 's this in one annihilated city,
 Where thousand loves, and ties, and duties grew?
 Cockneys of London! Muscadins of Paris!
 Just ponder what a pious pastime war is.

 Think how the joys of reading a Gazette
 Are purchased by all agonies and crimes:
 Or if these do not move you, don't forget
 Such doom may be your own in aftertimes.
 Meantime the Taxes, Castlereagh, and Debt,
 Are hints as good as sermons, or as rhymes.
 Read your own hearts and Ireland's present story,
 Then feed her famine fat with Wellesley's glory.

 But still there is unto a patriot nation,
 Which loves so well its country and its king,
 A subject of sublimest exultation -
 Bear it, ye Muses, on your brightest wing!
 Howe'er the mighty locust, Desolation,
 Strip your green fields, and to your harvests cling,
 Gaunt famine never shall approach the throne -
 Though Ireland starve, great George weighs twenty stone.

 But let me put an end unto my theme:
 There was an end of Ismail - hapless town!
 Far flash'd her burning towers o'er Danube's stream,
 And redly ran his blushing waters down.
 The horrid war-whoop and the shriller scream
 Rose still; but fainter were the thunders grown:
 Of forty thousand who had mann'd the wall,
 Some hundreds breathed - the rest were silent all!

 In one thing ne'ertheless 't is fit to praise
 The Russian army upon this occasion,
 A virtue much in fashion now-a-days,
 And therefore worthy of commemoration:
 The topic 's tender, so shall be my phrase -
 Perhaps the season's chill, and their long station
 In winter's depth, or want of rest and victual,
 Had made them chaste; - they ravish'd very little.

 Much did they slay, more plunder, and no less
 Might here and there occur some violation
 In the other line; - but not to such excess
 As when the French, that dissipated nation,
 Take towns by storm: no causes can I guess,
 Except cold weather and commiseration;
 But all the ladies, save some twenty score,
 Were almost as much virgins as before.

 Some odd mistakes, too, happen'd in the dark,
 Which show'd a want of lanterns, or of taste -
 Indeed the smoke was such they scarce could mark
 Their friends from foes, - besides such things from haste
 Occur, though rarely, when there is a spark
 Of light to save the venerably chaste:
 But six old damsels, each of seventy years,
 Were all deflower'd by different grenadiers.

 But on the whole their continence was great;
 So that some disappointment there ensued
 To those who had felt the inconvenient state
 Of 'single blessedness,' and thought it good
 (Since it was not their fault, but only fate,
 To bear these crosses) for each waning prude
 To make a Roman sort of Sabine wedding,
 Without the expense and the suspense of bedding.

 Some voices of the buxom middle-aged
 Were also heard to wonder in the din
 (Widows of forty were these birds long caged)
 'Wherefore the ravishing did not begin!'
 But while the thirst for gore and plunder raged,
 There was small leisure for superfluous sin;
 But whether they escaped or no, lies hid
 In darkness - I can only hope they did.

 Suwarrow now was conqueror - a match
 For Timour or for Zinghis in his trade.
 While mosques and streets, beneath his eyes, like thatch
 Blazed, and the cannon's roar was scarce allay'd,
 With bloody hands he wrote his first despatch;
 And here exactly follows what he said: -
 'Glory to God and to the Empress!' (Powers
 Eternal! such names mingled!) 'Ismail 's ours.'

 Methinks these are the most tremendous words,
 Since 'Mene, Mene, Tekel,' and 'Upharsin,'
 Which hands or pens have ever traced of swords.
 Heaven help me! I 'm but little of a parson:
 What Daniel read was short-hand of the Lord's,
 Severe, sublime; the prophet wrote no farce on
 The fate of nations; - but this Russ so witty
 Could rhyme, like Nero, o'er a burning city.

 He wrote this Polar melody, and set it,
 Duly accompanied by shrieks and groans,
 Which few will sing, I trust, but none forget it -
 For I will teach, if possible, the stones
 To rise against earth's tyrants. Never let it
 Be said that we still truckle unto thrones; -
 But ye - our children's children! think how we
 Show'd what things were before the world was free!

 That hour is not for us, but 't is for you:
 And as, in the great joy of your millennium,
 You hardly will believe such things were true
 As now occur, I thought that I would pen you 'em;
 But may their very memory perish too!-
 Yet if perchance remember'd, still disdain you 'em
 More than you scorn the savages of yore,
 Who painted their bare limbs, but not with gore.

 And when you hear historians talk of thrones,
 And those that sate upon them, let it be
 As we now gaze upon the mammoth's bones,
 'And wonder what old world such things could see,
 Or hieroglyphics on Egyptian stones,
 The pleasant riddles of futurity -
 Guessing at what shall happily be hid,
 As the real purpose of a pyramid.

 Reader! I have kept my word, - at least so far
 As the first Canto promised. You have now
 Had sketches of love, tempest, travel, war -
 All very accurate, you must allow,
 And epic, if plain truth should prove no bar;
 For I have drawn much less with a long bow
 Than my forerunners. Carelessly I sing,
 But Phoebus lends me now and then a string,

 With which I still can harp, and carp, and fiddle.
 What farther hath befallen or may befall
 The hero of this grand poetic riddle,
 I by and by may tell you, if at all:
 But now I choose to break off in the middle,
 Worn out with battering Ismail's stubborn wall,
 While Juan is sent off with the despatch,
 For which all Petersburgh is on the watch.

 This special honour was conferr'd, because
 He had behaved with courage and humanity -
 Which last men like, when they have time to pause
 From their ferocities produced by vanity.
 His little captive gain'd him some applause
 For saving her amidst the wild insanity
 Of carnage, - and I think he was more glad in her
 Safety, than his new order of St. Vladimir.

 The Moslem orphan went with her protector,
 For she was homeless, houseless, helpless; all
 Her friends, like the sad family of Hector,
 Had perish'd in the field or by the wall:
 Her very place of birth was but a spectre
 Of what it had been; there the Muezzin's cal
 To prayer was heard no more! - and Juan wept,
 And made a vow to shield her, which he kept.
