---
author: George MacDonald 
title: Translations. - The Lost Church. (From Uhland.)
---

In the far forest, overhead,
 A bell is often heard obscurely;
How long since first, no one can tell--
 Nor can report explain it surely:
From the lost church, the rumour hath,
 Out on the winds the ringing goeth;
Once full of pilgrims was the path--
 Now where to find it, no one knoweth.

Deep in the wood I lately went
 Where no foot-trodden way is lying;
From times corrupt, on evil bent,
 My heart to God went out in sighing:
There, in the wild wood's deep repose,
 I heard the ringing somewhat nearer;
The higher that my longing rose
 Its peal grew fuller and came clearer.

My thoughts upon themselves did brood;
 My sense was with the sound so busy
That I have never understood
 How I did climb that steep so dizzy.
It seemed more than a hundred years
 Had passed me over, dreaming, sighing--
When far above the clouds appears
 An open space in sunlight lying.

Dark-blue the heavens above it bowed;
 The sun was radiant, large, and glowing;
And, see, a minister's structure proud
 Stood in the rich light, golden showing.
The clouds around it, sunny-clear,
 Seemed bearing it aloft like pinions;
Its spire-point seemed to disappear,
 Slow vanishing in heaven's dominions.

The bell's clear tones, of rapture full,
 Boomed in the tower and made it quiver;
No mortal hand that rope did pull--
 A dumb storm made it swing and shiver.
It seemed to heave my throbbing breast,
 That heavenly storm with torrent blended:
With wavering step, yet hopeful quest,
 Into the church my way I wended.

What met me there as in I trode
 With syllables cannot be painted;
Darksome yet clear, the windows glowed
 With forms of all the martyrs sainted.
Then saw I, radiantly unfurled,
 Form swell to life and break its barriers;
I looked abroad into a world
 Of holy women and God's warriors.

Down at the alter I kneeled soft,
 With love and prayer my heart allegiant:
Upon the ceiling, far aloft,
 Was painted Heaven's resplendent pageant;
But when again I lift mine eyes,
 Lo, the high vault has flown asunder!
The upward gate wide open lies,
 And every veil unveils a wonder.

What gloriousness I then beheld
 With silent worship, speechless wonder;
What blessed sounds upon me swelled,
 Like organs' and like trumpets' thunder--
No human words could ever tell!--
 But who for such is sighing sorest,
Let him give heed unto the bell
 That dimly soundeth in the forest.
