---
author: George MacDonald 
title: The Diary Of An Old Soul. - August.
---

 1.

 SO shall abundant entrance me be given
 Into the truth, my life's inheritance.
 Lo! as the sun shoots straight from out his tomb,
 God-floated, casting round a lordly glance
 Into the corners of his endless room,
 So, through the rent which thou, O Christ, hast riven,
 I enter liberty's divine expanse.

 2.

 It will be so--ah, so it is not now!
 Who seeks thee for a little lazy peace,
 Then, like a man all weary of the plough,
 That leaves it standing in the furrow's crease,
 Turns from thy presence for a foolish while,
 Till comes again the rasp of unrest's file,
 From liberty is distant many a mile.

 3.

 Like one that stops, and drinks, and turns, and goes
 Into a land where never water flows,
 There travels on, the dry and thirsty day,
 Until the hot night veils the farther way,
 Then turns and finds again the bubbling pool--
 Here would I build my house, take up my stay,
 Nor ever leave my Sychar's margin cool.

 4.

 Keep me, Lord, with thee. I call from out the dark--
 Hear in thy light, of which I am a spark.
 I know not what is mine and what is thine--
 Of branch and stem I miss the differing mark--
 But if a mere hair's-breadth me separateth,
 That hair's-breadth is eternal, infinite death.
 For sap thy dead branch calls, O living vine!

 5.

 I have no choice, I must do what I can;
 But thou dost me, and all things else as well;
 Thou wilt take care thy child shall grow a man.
 Rouse thee, my faith; be king; with life be one;
 To trust in God is action's highest kind;
 Who trusts in God, his heart with life doth swell;
 Faith opens all the windows to God's wind.

 6.

 O Father, thou art my eternity.
 Not on the clasp Of consciousness--on thee
 My life depends; and I can well afford
 All to forget, so thou remember, Lord.
 In thee I rest; in sleep thou dost me fold;
 In thee I labour; still in thee, grow old;
 And dying, shall I not in thee, my Life, be bold?

 7.

 In holy things may be unholy greed.
 Thou giv'st a glimpse of many a lovely thing,
 Not to be stored for use in any mind,
 But only for the present spiritual need.
 The holiest bread, if hoarded, soon will breed
 The mammon-moth, the having-pride, I find.
 'Tis momently thy heart gives out heart-quickening.

 8.

 It is thyself, and neither this nor that,
 Nor anything, told, taught, or dreamed of thee,
 That keeps us live. The holy maid who sat
 Low at thy feet, choosing the better part,
 Rising, bore with her--what a memory!
 Yet, brooding only on that treasure, she
 Had soon been roused by conscious loss of heart.

 9.

 I am a fool when I would stop and think,
 And lest I lose my thoughts, from duty shrink.
 It is but avarice in another shape.
 'Tis as the vine-branch were to hoard the grape,
 Nor trust the living root beneath the sod.
 What trouble is that child to thee, my God,
 Who sips thy gracious cup, and will not drink!

 10.

 True, faithful action only is the life,
 The grapes for which we feel the pruning knife.
 Thoughts are but leaves; they fall and feed the ground.
 The holy seasons, swift and slow, go round;
 The ministering leaves return, fresh, large, and rife--
 But fresher, larger, more thoughts to the brain:--
 Farewell, my dove!--come back, hope-laden, through the rain.

 11.

 Well may this body poorer, feebler grow!
 It is undressing for its last sweet bed;
 But why should the soul, which death shall never know,
 Authority, and power, and memory shed?
 It is that love with absolute faith would wed;
 God takes the inmost garments off his child,
 To have him in his arms, naked and undefiled.

 12.

 Thou art my knowledge and my memory,
 No less than my real, deeper life, my love.
 I will not fool, degrade myself to trust
 In less than that which maketh me say Me,
 In less than that causing itself to be.
 Then art within me, behind, beneath, above--
 I will be thine because I may and must.

 13.

 Thou art the truth, the life. Thou, Lord, wilt see
 To every question that perplexes me.
 I am thy being; and my dignity
 Is written with my name down in thy book;
 Thou wilt care for it. Never shall I think
 Of anything that thou mightst overlook:--
 In faith-born triumph at thy feet I sink.

 14.

 Thou carest more for that which I call mine,
 In same sort--better manner than I could,
 Even if I knew creation's ends divine,
 Rousing in me this vague desire of good.
 Thou art more to me than my desires' whole brood;
 Thou art the only person, and I cry
 Unto the father I of this my I.

 15.

 Thou who inspirest prayer, then bend'st thine ear;
 It, crying with love's grand respect to hear!
 I cannot give myself to thee aright--
 With the triumphant uttermost of gift;
 That cannot be till I am full of light--
 To perfect deed a perfect will must lift:--
 Inspire, possess, compel me, first of every might.

 16.

 I do not wonder men can ill believe
 Who make poor claims upon thee, perfect Lord;
 Then most I trust when most I would receive.
 I wonder not that such do pray and grieve--
 The God they think, to be God is not fit.
 Then only in thy glory I seem to sit,
 When my heart claims from thine an infinite accord.

 17.

 More life I need ere I myself can be.
 Sometimes, when the eternal tide ebbs low,
 A moment weary of my life I grow--
 Weary of my existence' self, I mean,
 Not of its plodding, not its wind and snow
 Then to thy knee trusting I turn, and lean:
 Thou will'st I live, and I do will with thee.

 18.

 Dost thou mean sometimes that we should forget thee,
 Dropping the veil of things 'twixt thee and us?--
 Ah, not that we should lose thee and regret thee!
 But that, we turning from our windows thus,
 The frost-fixed God should vanish from the pane,
 Sun-melted, and a moment, Father, let thee
 Look like thyself straight into heart and brain.

 19.

 For sometimes when I am busy among men,
 With heart and brain an open thoroughfare
 For faces, words, and thoughts other than mine,
 And a pause comes at length--oh, sudden then,
 Back throbs the tide with rush exultant rare;
 And for a gentle moment I divine
 Thy dawning presence flush my tremulous air.

 20.

 If I have to forget thee, do thou see
 It be a good, not bad forgetfulness;
 That all its mellow, truthful air be free
 From dusty noes, and soft with many a yes;
 That as thy breath my life, my life may be
 Man's breath. So when thou com'st at hour unknown,
 Thou shalt find nothing in me but thine own.

 21.

 Thou being in me, in my deepest me,
 Through all the time I do not think of thee,
 Shall I not grow at last so true within
 As to forget thee and yet never sin?
 Shall I not walk the loud world's busy way,
 Yet in thy palace-porch sit all the day?
 Not conscious think of thee, yet never from thee stray?

 22.

 Forget!--Oh, must it be?--Would it were rather
 That every sense was so filled with my father
 That not in anything could I forget him,
 But deepest, highest must in all things set him!--
 Yet if thou think in me, God, what great matter
 Though my poor thought to former break and latter--
 As now my best thoughts; break, before thee foiled, and scatter!

 23.

 Some way there must be of my not forgetting,
 And thither thou art leading me, my God.
 The child that, weary of his mother's petting,
 Runs out the moment that his feet are shod,
 May see her face in every flower he sees,
 And she, although beyond the window sitting,
 Be nearer him than when he sat upon her knees.

 24.

 What if, when I at last, at the long last,
 Shall see thy face, my Lord, my life's delight,
 It should not be the face that hath been glassed
 In poor imagination's mirror slight!
 Will my soul sink, and shall I stand aghast,
 Beggared of hope, my heart a conscious blight,
 Amazed and lost--death's bitterness come and not passed?

 25.

 Ah, no! for from thy heart the love will press,
 And shining from thy perfect human face,
 Will sink into me like the father's kiss;
 And deepening wide the gulf of consciousness
 Beyond imagination's lowest abyss,
 Will, with the potency of creative grace,
 Lord it throughout the larger thinking place.

 26.

 Thus God-possessed, new born, ah, not for long
 Should I the sight behold, beatified,
 Know it creating in me, feel the throng
 Of speechless hopes out-throbbing like a tide,
 And my heart rushing, borne aloft the flood,
 To offer at his feet its living blood--
 Ere, glory-hid, the other face I spied.

 27.

 For out imagination is, in small,
 And with the making-difference that must be,
 Mirror of God's creating mirror; all
 That shows itself therein, that formeth he,
 And there is Christ, no bodiless vanity,
 Though, face to face, the mighty perfectness
 With glory blurs the dim-reflected less.

 28.

 I clasp thy feet, O father of the living!
 Thou wilt not let my fluttering hopes be more,
 Or lovelier, or greater, than thy giving!
 Surely thy ships will bring to my poor shore,
 Of gold and peacocks such a shining store
 As will laugh all the dreams to holy scorn,
 Of love and sorrow that were ever born.

 29.

 Sometimes it seems pure natural to trust,
 And trust right largely, grandly, infinitely,
 Daring the splendour of the giver's part;
 At other times, the whole earth is but dust,
 The sky is dust, yea, dust the human heart;
 Then art thou nowhere, there is no room for thee
 In the great dust-heap of eternity.

 30.

 But why should it be possible to mistrust--
 Nor possible only, but its opposite hard?
 Why should not man believe because he must--
 By sight's compulsion? Why should he be scarred
 With conflict? worn with doubting fine and long?--
 No man is fit for heaven's musician throng
 Who has not tuned an instrument all shook and jarred.

 31.

 Therefore, O Lord, when all things common seem,
 When all is dust, and self the centre clod,
 When grandeur is a hopeless, foolish dream,
 And anxious care more reasonable than God,--
 Out of the ashes I will call to thee--
 In spite of dead distrust call earnestly:--
 Oh thou who livest, call, then answer dying me.
