---
author: Harriet Annie Wilkins 
title: The Curl of Gold.
---

How wildly blows the wintry wind, deep lies the drifting snow
On the hillside, and the roadside, and the valleys down below;
And up the gorge all through last night the rushing storm flew fast,
And there old walls and casements were rattling in the blast.
Lady, I had a dream last night, born of the storm and pain,
I dreamed it was the time of spring; but the clouds were black with rain.
I thought that I was on the bay, a good way out from shore
Alone, and feeling much afraid at the wild tempest's roar,
I tried to reach the distant land, but could not find the way,
And suddenly my boat capsized far out upon the bay.
I shrieked in wildest agony amid the thunder shock,
When I heard you saying unto me, "Beneath us is a Rock,
Trust not to me, these waves are strong, but lift your tear-dimmed eye--
That star will lead us to the rock that higher is than I."
And through the drenching wave and surf, together on we passed,
Till the bright green slopes of Hamilton shone clearly out at last.
It seemed so strange, we stepped ashore, your garments were all dry,
And, holding hands as we do now, I heard you say "good-bye."
Dear lady, now I see it all, those blessed words you said
Were with me in the storm last night, like angels round my bed.
"So many and great dangers that we cannot stand upright,"
"Defend us by thy mercy, from all perils of this night."
Lady, I am a mother, none know it here save you;
Don't blush for me, there is no shame, I am a wife, leal and true.
Lady, true love is born of heaven, we may deem it dead and past,
And sit with bowed down head alone, the heart's door closed and fast;
When suddenly we hear a voice, and spite of bolt or bar,
Like its dear Master, there it stands, stretching its arms afar;
Though buried up it rises, though dead it lives anew,
And breathes again its Master's words, "Sweet peace be unto you,"
Folks say, "There is a mystery about that poor sick girl,"
Lady, there's mystery round us all, that angels will unfurl,
I have one favor now to ask, within this paper's fold,
There's a little lock of baby's hair, just half one curl of gold,
When I am in my coffin, and soon now I'll be at rest,
Will you lay this little curl of gold upon my quiet breast,
God and the angels only know where the other half lies hid,
In the green sod of old Ireland, neath a baby's coffin lid,
Don't'leave me yet, it is near night, I feel so strange to-day,
You know the prayers for dying ones, oh kneel once more and pray,

Thank God for sending one to me, where the wild tempests roll,
You won't forget--the little curl--Saviour receive my soul.

