---
author: Herman Melville 
title: Chattanooga
---

 (November, 1863.)


 A kindling impulse seized the host
 Inspired by heaven's elastic air;[10]
 Their hearts outran their General's plan,
 Though Grant commanded there - 
 Grant, who without reserve can dare;
 And, "Well, go on and do your will"
 He said, and measured the mountain then:
 So master-riders fling the rein - 
 But you must know your men.

 On yester-morn in grayish mist,
 Armies like ghosts on hills had fought,
 And rolled from the cloud their thunders loud
 The Cumberlands far had caught:
 To-day the sunlit steeps are sought.
 Grant stood on cliffs whence all was plain,
 And smoked as one who feels no cares;
 But mastered nervousness intense
 Alone such calmness wears.

 The summit-cannon plunge their flame
 Sheer down the primal wall,
 But up and up each linking troop
 In stretching festoons crawl - 
 Nor fire a shot. Such men appall
 The foe, though brave. He, from the brink,
 Looks far along the breadth of slope,
 And sees two miles of dark dots creep,
 And knows they mean the cope.

 He sees them creep. Yet here and there
 Half hid 'mid leafless groves they go;
 As men who ply through traceries high
 Of turreted marbles show - 
 So dwindle these to eyes below.
 But fronting shot and flanking shell
 Sliver and rive the inwoven ways;
 High tops of oaks and high hearts fall,
 But never the climbing stays.

 From right to left, from left to right
 They roll the rallying cheer - 
 Vie with each other, brother with brother,
 Who shall the first appear - 
 What color-bearer with colors clear
 In sharp relief, like sky-drawn Grant,
 Whose cigar must now be near the stump - 
 While in solicitude his back
 Heap slowly to a hump.

 Near and more near; till now the flags
 Run like a catching flame;
 And one flares highest, to peril nighest - 
 He means to make a name:
 Salvos! they give him his fame.
 The staff is caught, and next the rush,
 And then the leap where death has led;
 Flag answered flag along the crest,
 And swarms of rebels fled.

 But some who gained the envied Alp,
 And - eager, ardent, earnest there - 
 Dropped into Death's wide-open arms,
 Quelled on the wing like eagles struck in air - 
 Forever they slumber young and fair,
 The smile upon them as they died;
 Their end attained, that end a height:
 Life was to these a dream fulfilled,
 And death a starry night.
 
 10. Although the month was November, the day was in character an October one - cool, clear, bright, intoxicatingly invigorating; one of those days peculiar to the ripest hours of our American Autumn. This weather must have had much to do with the spontaneous enthusiasm which seized the troops - and enthusiasm aided, doubtless, by glad thoughts of the victory of Look-out Mountain won the day previous, and also by the elation attending the capture, after a fierce struggle, of the long ranges of rifle-pits at the mountain's base, where orders for the time should have stopped the advance. But there and then it was that the army took the bit between its teeth, and ran away with the generals to the victory commemorated. General Grant, at Culpepper, a few weeks prior to crossing the Rapidan for the Wilderness, expressed to a visitor his impression of the impulse and the spectacle: Said he: "I never saw any thing like it:" language which seems curiously undertoned, considering its application; but from the taciturn Commander it was equivalent to a superlative or hyperbole from the talkative. 

The height of the Ridge, according to the account at hand, varies along its length from six to seven hundred feet above the plain; it slopes at an angle of about forty-five degrees. 

