---
author: James Whitcomb Riley 
title: The Gilded Roll.
---

	Nosing around in an old box - packed away, and lost to memory for
	years - an hour ago I found a musty package of gilt paper, or rather, a
	roll it was, with the green-tarnished gold of the old sheet for the
	outer wrapper. I picked it up mechanically to toss it into some
	obscure corner, when, carelessly lifting it by one end, a child's tin
	whistle dropped therefrom and fell tinkling on the attic floor. It
	lies before me on my writing table now - and so, too, does the roll
	entire, though now a roll no longer, - for my eager fingers have
	unrolled the gilded covering, and all its precious contents are spread
	out beneath my hungry eyes.

	Here is a scroll of ink-written music. I don't read music, but I know
	the dash and swing of the pen that rained it on the page. Here is a
	letter, with the self-same impulse and abandon in every syllable; and
	its melody - however sweet the other - is far more sweet to me. And here
	are other letters like it - three - five - and seven, at least. Bob wrote
	them from the front, and Billy kept them for me when I went to join
	him. Dear boy! Dear boy!

	Here are some cards of bristol-board. Ah! when Bob came to these there
	were no blotches then. What faces - what expressions! The droll,
	ridiculous, good-for-nothing genius, with his "sad mouth," as he
	called it, "upside down," laughing always - at everything, at big
	rallies, and mass-meetings and conventions, county fairs, and floral
	halls, booths, watermelon-wagons, dancing-tents, the swing,
	Daguerrean-car, the "lung-barometer," and the air-gun man. Oh! what a
	gifted, good-for-nothing boy Bob was in those old days! And here 's a
	picture of a girlish face - a very faded photograph - even fresh from
	"the gallery," five and twenty years ago it was a faded thing. But the
	living face - how bright and clear that was! - for "Doc," Bob's awful
	name for her, was a pretty girl, and brilliant, clever, lovable every
	way. No wonder Bob fancied her! And you could see some hint of her
	jaunty loveliness in every fairy face he drew, and you could find her
	happy ways and dainty tastes unconsciously assumed in all he did - the
	books he read - the poems he admired, and those he wrote; and, ringing
	clear and pure and jubilant, the vibrant beauty of her voice could
	clearly be defined and traced through all his music. Now, there's the
	happy pair of them - Bob and Doc. Make of them just whatever your good
	fancy may dictate, but keep in mind the stern, relentless ways of
	destiny.

	You are not at the beginning of a novel, only at the threshold of one
	of a hundred experiences that lie buried in the past, and this
	particular one most happily resurrected by these odds and ends found
	in the gilded roll.

	You see, dating away back, the contents of this package, mainly, were
	hastily gathered together after a week's visit out at the old Mills
	farm; the gilt paper, and the whistle, and the pictures, they were
	Billy's; the music pages, Bob's, or Doc's; the letters and some other
	manuscripts were mine.

	The Mills girls were great friends of Doc's, and often came to visit
	her in town; and so Doc often visited the Mills's. This is the way
	that Bob first got out there, and won them all, and "shaped the thing"
	for me, as he would put it; and lastly, we had lugged in Billy, - such
	a handy boy, you know, to hold the horses on picnic excursions, and to
	watch the carriage and the luncheon, and all that. - "Yes, and," Bob
	would say, "such a serviceable boy in getting all the fishing tackle
	in proper order, and digging bait, and promenading in our wake up and
	down the creek all day, with the minnow-bucket hanging on his arm,
	don't you know!"

	But jolly as the days were, I think jollier were the long evenings at
	the farm. After the supper in the grove, where, when the weather
	permitted, always stood the table, ankle-deep in the cool green plush
	of the sward; and after the lounge upon the grass, and the cigars, and
	the new fish stories, and the general invoice of the old ones, it was
	delectable to get back to the girls again, and in the old "best room"
	hear once more the lilt of the old songs and the stacattoed laughter
	of the piano mingling with the alto and falsetto voices of the Mills
	girls, and the gallant soprano of the dear girl Doc.

	This is the scene I want you to look in upon, as, in fancy, I do
	now - and here are the materials for it all, husked from the gilded
	roll:

	Bob, the master, leans at the piano now, and Doc is at the keys, her
	glad face often thrown up sidewise toward his own. His face is
	boyish - for there is yet but the ghost of a mustache upon his lip. His
	eyes are dark and clear, of over-size when looking at you, but now
	their lids are drooped above his violin, whose melody has, for the
	time, almost smoothed away the upward kinkings of the corners of his
	mouth. And wonderfully quiet now is every one, and the chords of the
	piano, too, are low and faltering; and so, at last, the tune itself
	swoons into the universal hush, and - Bob is rasping, in its stead, the
	ridiculous, but marvelously perfect imitation of the "priming" of a
	pump, while Billy's hands forget the "chiggers" on the bare backs of
	his feet, as, with clapping palms, he dances round the room in
	ungovernable spasms of delight. And then we all laugh; and Billy,
	taking advantage of the general tumult, pulls Bob's head down and
	whispers, "Git 'em to stay up 'way late to-night!" And Bob, perhaps
	remembering that we go back home to-morrow, winks at the little fellow
	and whispers, "You let me manage 'em! Stay up till broad daylight if
	we take a notion - eh?" And Billy dances off again in newer glee, while
	the inspired musician is plunking a banjo imitation on his enchanted
	instrument, which is unceremoniously drowned out by a circus-tune from
	Doc that is absolutely inspiring to everyone but the barefooted
	brother, who drops back listlessly to his old position on the floor
	and sullenly renews operations on his "chigger" claims.

	"Thought you was goin' to have pop-corn to-night all so fast!" he
	says, doggedly, in the midst of a momentary lull that has fallen on a
	game of whist. And then the oldest Mills girl, who thinks cards stupid
	anyhow, says: "That's so, Billy; and we're going to have it, too; and
	right away, for this game's just ending, and I shan't submit to being
	bored with another. I say 'pop-corn' with Billy! And after that," she
	continues, rising and addressing the party in general, "we must have
	another literary and artistic tournament, and that's been in
	contemplation and preparation long enough; so you gentlemen can be
	pulling your wits together for the exercises, while us girls see to
	the refreshments."

	"Have you done anything toward it!" queries Bob, when the girls are
	gone, with the alert Billy in their wake.

	"Just an outline," I reply. "How with you?"

	"Clean forgot it - that is, the preparation; but I've got a little old
	second-hand idea, if you'll all help me out with it, that'll amuse us
	some, and tickle Billy I'm certain."

	So that's agreed upon; and while Bob produces his portfolio, drawing
	paper, pencils and so on, I turn to my note-book in a dazed way and
	begin counting my fingers in a depth of profound abstraction, from
	which I am barely aroused by the reappearance of the girls and Billy.

	"Goody, goody, goody! Bob's goin' to make pictures!" cries Billy, in
	additional transport to that the cake pop-corn has produced.

	"Now, you girls," says Bob, gently detaching the affectionate Billy
	from one leg and moving a chair to the table, with a backward glance
	of intelligence toward the boy, - "you girls are to help us all you
	can, and we can all work; but, as I'll have all the illustrations to
	do, I want you to do as many of the verses as you can - that'll be
	easy, you know, - because the work entire is just to consist of a
	series of fool-epigrams, such as, for instance. - Listen, Billy:

	 Here lies a young man
	 Who in childhood began
	To swear, and to smoke, and to drink, -
	 In his twentieth year
	 He quit swearing and beer,
	And yet is still smoking, I think."

	And the rest of his instructions are delivered in lower tones, that
	the boy may not hear; and then, all matters seemingly arranged, he
	turns to the boy with - "And now, Billy, no lookin' over shoulders, you
	know, or swinging on my chair-back while I'm at work. When the
	pictures are all finished, then you can take a squint at 'em, and not
	before. Is that all hunky, now?"

	"Oh! who's a-goin' to look over your shoulder - only Doc." And as the
	radiant Doc hastily quits that very post, and dives for the offending
	brother, he scrambles under the piano and laughs derisively.

	And then a silence falls upon the group - a gracious quiet, only
	intruded upon by the very juicy and exuberant munching of an apple
	from a remote fastness of the room, and the occasional thumping of a
	bare heel against the floor.

	At last I close my note-book with a half slam.

	"That means," says Bob, laying down his pencil, and addressing the
	girls, - "That means he's concluded his poem, and that he's not pleased
	with it in any manner, and that he intends declining to read it, for
	that self-acknowledged reason, and that he expects us to believe every
	affected word of his entire speech - "

	"Oh, don't!" I exclaim.

	"Then give us the wretched production, in all its hideous deformity!"

	And the girls all laugh so sympathetically, and Bob joins them so
	gently, and yet with a tone, I know, that can be changed so quickly to
	my further discomfiture, that I arise at once and read, without
	apology or excuse, this primitive and very callow poem recovered here
	to-day from the gilded roll:




	A BACKWARD LOOK.



	 As I sat smoking, alone, yesterday,
	And lazily leaning back in my chair,
	 Enjoying myself in a general way -
	 Allowing my thoughts a holiday
	From weariness, toil and care, -
	 My fancies - doubtless, for ventilation -
	Left ajar the gates of my mind, -
	 And Memory, seeing the situation,
	Slipped out in street of "Auld Lang Syne."

	 Wandering ever with tireless feet
	Through scenes of silence, and jubilee
	 Of long-hushed voices; and faces sweet
	 Were thronging the shadowy side of the street
	As far as the eye could see;
	 Dreaming again, in anticipation,
	The same old dreams of our boyhood's days
	 That never come true, from the vague sensation
	Of walking asleep in the world's strange ways.

	 Away to the house where I was born!
	And there was the selfsame clock that ticked
	 From the close of dusk to the burst of morn,
	 When life-warm hands plucked the golden corn
	And helped when the apples were picked.
	 And the "chany-dog" on the mantel-shelf,
	With the gilded collar and yellow eyes,
	 Looked just as at first, when I hugged myself
	Sound asleep with the dear surprise.

	 And down to the swing in the locust tree,
	Where the grass was worn from the trampled ground,
	 And where "Eck" Skinner, "Old" Carr, and three
	 Or four such other boys used to be
	Doin' "sky-scrapers," or "whirlin' round:"
	 And again Bob climbed for the bluebird's nest,
	And again "had shows" in the buggy-shed
	 Of Guymon's barn, where still, unguessed,
	The old ghosts romp through the best days dead!

	 And again I gazed from the old school-room
	With a wistful look of a long June day,
	 When on my cheek was the hectic bloom
	 Caught of Mischief, as I presume -
	He had such a "partial" way,
	 It seemed, toward me. - And again I thought
	Of a probable likelihood to be
	 Kept in after school - for a girl was caught
	Catching a note from me.

	 And down through the woods to the swimming-hole -
	Where the big, white, hollow, old sycamore grows, -
	 And we never cared when the water was cold,
	 And always "ducked" the boy that told
	On the fellow that tied the clothes. -
	 When life went so like a dreamy rhyme,
	That it seems to me now that then
	 The world was having a jollier time
	Than it ever will have again.

	The crude production is received, I am glad to note, with some
	expressions of favor from the company, though Bob, of course, must
	heartlessly dissipate my weak delight by saying, "Well, it's certainly
	bad enough; though," he goes on with an air of deepest critical
	sagacity and fairness, "considered, as it should be, justly, as the
	production of a jour-poet, why, it might be worse - that is, a little
	worse."

	"Probably," I remember saying, - "Probably I might redeem myself by
	reading you this little amateurish bit of verse, enclosed to me in a
	letter by mistake, not very long ago." I here fish an envelope from my
	pocket the address of which all recognize as in Bob's almost printed
	writing. He smiles vacantly at it - then vividly colors.

	"What date?" he stoically asks.

	"The date," I suggestively answer, "of your last letter to our dear
	Doc, at Boarding-School, two days exactly in advance of her coming
	home - this veritable visit now."

	Both Bob and Doc rush at me - but too late. The letter and contents
	have wholly vanished. The youngest Miss Mills quiets us - urgently
	distracting us, in fact, by calling our attention to the immediate
	completion of our joint production; "For now," she says, "with our new
	reinforcement, we can, with becoming diligence, soon have it ready for
	both printer and engraver, and then we'll wake up the boy (who has
	been fortunately slumbering for the last quarter of an hour), and
	present to him, as designed and intended, this matchless creation of
	our united intellects." At the conclusion of this speech we all go
	good-humoredly to work, and at the close of half an hour the tedious,
	but most ridiculous, task is announced completed.

	As I arrange and place in proper form here on the table the separate
	cards - twenty-seven in number - I sigh to think that I am unable to
	transcribe for you the best part of the nonsensical work - the
	illustrations. All I can give is the written copy of -



	BILLY'S ALPHABETICAL ANIMAL SHOW.



	 A was an elegant Ape
	 Who tied up his ears with red tape,
	And wore a long veil
	Half revealing his tail
	 Which was trimmed with jet bugles and crape.

	 B was a boastful old Bear
	 Who used to say, - "Hoomh! I declare
	I can eat - if you'll get me
	The children, and let me -
	 Ten babies, teeth, toenails and hair!"

	 C was a Codfish who sighed
	 When snatched from the home of his pride,
	But could he, embrined,
	Guess this fragrance behind,
	 How glad he would be that he died!

	 D was a dandified Dog
	 Who said, - "Though it's raining like fog
	I wear no umbrellah,
	Me boy, for a fellah
	 Might just as well travel incog!"

	 E was an elderly Eel
	 Who would say, - "Well, I really feel -
	As my grandchildren wriggle
	And shout 'I should giggle' -
	 A trifle run down at the heel!"

	 F was a Fowl who conceded
	 Some hens might hatch more eggs than she did, -
	But she'd children as plenty
	As eighteen or twenty,
	 And that was quite all that she needed.

	 G was a gluttonous Goat
	 Who, dining one day, table-d'hote,
	Ordered soup-bone, au fait,
	And fish, papier-mache,
	 And a filet of Spring overcoat.

	 H was a high-cultured Hound
	 Who could clear forty feet at a bound,
	And a coon once averred
	That his howl could be heard
	 For five miles and three-quarters around.

	 I was an Ibex ambitious
	 To dive over chasms auspicious;
	He would leap down a peak
	And not light for a week,
	 And swear that the jump was delicious.

	 J was a Jackass who said
	 He had such a bad cold in his head,
	If it wasn't for leaving
	The rest of us grieving,
	 He'd really rather be dead.

	 K was a profligate Kite
	 Who would haunt the saloons every night;
	And often he ust
	To reel back to his roost
	 Too full to set up on it right.

	 L was a wary old Lynx
	 Who would say, - "Do you know wot I thinks? -
	I thinks ef you happen
	To ketch me a-nappin'
	 I'm ready to set up the drinks!"

	 M was a merry old Mole,
	 Who would snooze all the day in his hole,
	Then - all night, a-rootin'
	Around and galootin' -
	 He'd sing "Johnny, Fill up the Bowl!"

	 N was a caustical Nautilus
	 Who sneered, "I suppose, when they've caught all us,
	Like oysters they'll serve us,
	And can us, preserve us,
	 And barrel, and pickle, and bottle us!"

	 O was an autocrat Owl -
	 Such a wise - such a wonderful fowl!
	Why, for all the night through
	He would hoot and hoo-hoo,
	 And hoot and hoo-hooter and howl!

	 P was a Pelican pet,
	 Who gobbled up all he could get;
	He could eat on until
	He was full to the bill,
	 And there he had lodgings to let!

	 Q was a querulous Quail,
	 Who said: "It will little avail
	The efforts of those
	Of my foes who propose
	 To attempt to put salt on my tail!"

	 R was a ring-tailed Raccoon,
	 With eyes of the tinge of the moon,
	And his nose a blue-black,
	And the fur on his back
	 A sad sort of sallow maroon.

	 S is a Sculpin - you'll wish
	 Very much to have one on your dish,
	Since all his bones grow
	On the outside, and so
	 He's a very desirable fish.

	 T was a Turtle, of wealth,
	 Who went round with particular stealth, -
	"Why," said he, "I'm afraid
	Of being waylaid
	 When I even walk out for my health!"

	 U was a Unicorn curious,
	 With one horn, of a growth so luxurious,
	He could level and stab it -
	If you didn't grab it -
	 Clean through you, he was so blamed furious!

	 V was a vagabond Vulture
	 Who said: "I don't want to insult yer,
	But when you intrude
	Where in lone solitude
	 I'm a-preyin', you're no man o' culture!"

	 W was a wild Woodchuck,
	 And you can just bet that he could "chuck"
	He'd eat raw potatoes,
	Green corn, and tomatoes,
	 And tree roots, and call it all "good chuck!"

	 X was a kind of X-cuse
	 Of a some-sort-o'-thing that got loose
	Before we could name it,
	And cage it, and tame it,
	 And bring it in general use.

	 Y is the Yellowbird, - bright
	 As a petrified lump of star-light,
	Or a handful of lightning-
	Bugs, squeezed in the tight'ning
	 Pink fist of a boy, at night.

	 Z is the Zebra, of course! -
	 A kind of a clown-of-a-horse, -
	Each other despising,
	Yet neither devising
	 A way to obtain a divorce!

	 &amp; here is the famous - what-is-it?
	 Walk up, Master Billy, and quiz it:
	You've seen the rest of 'em -
	Ain't this the best of 'em,
	 Right at the end of your visit?

	At last Billy is sent off to bed. It is the prudent mandate of the old
	folks: But so lothfully the poor child goes, Bob's heart goes,
	too. - Yes, Bob himself, to keep the little fellow company awhile, and,
	up there under the old rafters, in the pleasant gloom, lull him to
	famous dreams with fairy tales. And it is during this brief absence
	that the youngest Mills girl gives us a surprise. She will read a
	poem, she says, written by a very dear friend of hers who, fortunately
	for us, is not present to prevent her. We guard door and window as she
	reads. Doc says she will not listen; but she does listen, and cries,
	too - out of pure vexation, she asserts. The rest of us, however, cry
	just because of the apparent honesty of the poem of -



	BEAUTIFUL HANDS.


	 O your hands - they are strangely fair!
	 Fair - for the jewels that sparkle there, -
	 Fair - for the witchery of the spell
	 That ivory keys alone can tell;
	 But when their delicate touches rest
	 Here in my own do I love them best,
	 As I clasp with eager acquisitive spans
	 My glorious treasure of beautiful hands!

	 Marvelous - wonderful - beautiful hands!
	 They can coax roses to bloom in the strands
	 Of your brown tresses; and ribbons will twine,
	 Under mysterious touches of thine,
	 Into such knots as entangle the soul,
	 And fetter the heart under such a control
	 As only the strength of my love understands -
	 My passionate love for your beautiful hands.

	 As I remember the first fair touch
	 Of those beautiful hands that I love so much,
	 I seem to thrill as I then was thrilled,
	 Kissing the glove that I found unfilled -
	 When I met your gaze, and the queenly bow,
	 As you said to me, laughingly, "Keep it now!"
	 And dazed and alone in a dream I stand
	 Kissing this ghost of your beautiful hand.

	 When first I loved, in the long ago,
	 And held your hand as I told you so -
	 Pressed and caressed it and gave it a kiss,
	 And said "I could die fora hand like this!"
	 Little I dreamed love's fulness yet
	 Had to ripen when eyes were wet,
	 And prayers were vain in their wild demands
	 For one warm touch of your beautiful hands.

	 Beautiful Hands! O Beautiful Hands!
	 Could you reach out of the alien lands
	 Where you are lingering, and give me, to-night,
	 Only a touch - were it ever so light -
	 My heart were soothed, and my weary brain
	 Would lull itself into rest again;
	 For there is no solace the world commands
	 Like the caress of your beautiful hands.

	*****

	Violently winking at the mist that blurs my sight, I regretfully
	awaken to the here and now. And is it possible, I sorrowfully muse,
	that all this glory can have fled away? - that more than twenty long,
	long years are spread between me and that happy night? And is it
	possible that all the dear old faces - O, quit it! quit it! Gather the
	old scraps up and wad 'em back into oblivion, where they belong!

	Yes, but be calm - be calm! Think of cheerful things. You are not all
	alone. Billy's living yet.

	I know - and six feet high - and sag-shouldered - and owns a tin and
	stove-store, and can't hear thunder! Billy!

	And the youngest Mills girl - she's alive, too.

	S'pose I don't know that? I married her!

	And Doc. -

	Bob married her. Been in California for more than fifteen years - on
	some blasted cattle-ranch, or something, - and he's worth a half a
	million! And am I less prosperous with this gilded roll?
