---
author: James Whitcomb Riley 
title: Sweet-Knot And Galamus
---

AN OLD SWEETHEART.



 As one who cons at evening o'er an album all alone,
 And muses on the faces of the friends that he has known,
 So I turn the leaves of fancy till, in shadowy design,
 I find the smiling features of an old sweetheart of mine.

 The lamplight seems to glimmer with a flicker of surprise,
 As I turn it low to rest me of the dazzle in my eyes,
 And light my pipe in silence, save a sigh that seems to yoke
 Its fate with my tobacco and to vanish with the smoke.

 'Tis a fragrant retrospection - for the loving thoughts that start
 Into being are like perfumes from the blossom of the heart;
 And to dream the old dreams over is a luxury divine -
 When my truant fancy wanders with that old sweeheart of mine.

 Though I hear, beneath my study, like a fluttering of wings,
 The voices of my children, and the mother as she sings,
 I feel no twinge of conscience to deny me any theme
 When care has cast her anchor in the harbor of a dream

 In fact, to speak in earnest, I believe it adds a charm
 To spice the good a trifle with a little dust of harm -
 For I find an extra flavor in Memory's mellow wine
 That makes me drink the deeper to that old sweetheart of mine.

 A face of lily-beauty, with a form of airy grace,
 Floats out of my tobacco as the genii from the vase;
 And I thrill beneath the glances of a pair of azure eyes
 As glowing as the summer and as tender as the skies.

 I can see the pink sunbonnet and the little checkered dress
 She wore when first I kissed her and she answered the caress
 With the written declaration that, "as surely as the vine
 Grew 'round the stump," she loved me - that old sweetheart of mine.

 And again I feel the pressure of her slender little hand,
 As we used to talk together of the future we had planned -
 When I should be a poet, and with nothing else to do
 But write the tender verses that she set the music to:

 When we should live together in a cozy little cot
 Hid in a nest of roses, with a fairy garden-spot,
 Where the vines were ever fruited, and the weather ever fine,
 And the birds were ever singing for that old sweetheart of mine:

 When I should be her lover forever and a day,
 And she my faithful sweetheart till the golden hair was gray;
 And we should be so happy that when either's lips were dumb
 They would not smile in Heaven till the other's kiss had come.

*****

 But, ah! my dream is broken by a step upon the stair,
 And the door is softly opened, and - my wife is standing there;
 Yet with eagerness and rapture all my visions I resign
 To greet the living presence of that old sweetheart of mine.
