---
author: James Whitcomb Riley 
title: A Session With Uncle Sidney - I - One Of His Animal Stories
---

 Now, Tudens, you sit on this knee - and 'scuse
 It having no side-saddle on; - and, Jeems,
 You sit on this - and don't you wobble so
 And chug my old shins with your coppertoes; - 
 And, all the rest of you, range round someway, - 
 Ride on the rockers and hang to the arms
 Of our old-time splint-bottom carryall! - 
 Do anything but squabble for a place,
 Or push or shove or scrouge, or breathe out loud,
 Or chew wet, or knead taffy in my beard! - 
 Do anything almost - act anyway, - 
 Only keep still, so I can hear myself
 Trying to tell you "just one story more!"

 One winter afternoon my father, with
 A whistle to our dog, a shout to us - 
 His two boys - six and eight years old we were, - 
 Started off to the woods, a half a mile
 From home, where he was chopping wood. We raced,
 We slipped and slid; reaching, at last, the north
 Side of Tharp's corn-field. - There we struck what seemed
 To be a coon-track - so we all agreed:
 And father, who was not a hunter, to
 Our glad surprise, proposed we follow it.
 The snow was quite five inches deep; and we,
 Keen on the trail, were soon far in the woods.
 Our old dog, "Ring," ran nosing the fresh track
 With whimpering delight, far on ahead.
 After following the trail more than a mile
 To northward, through the thickest winter woods
 We boys had ever seen, - all suddenly
 He seemed to strike another trail; and then
 Our joyful attention was drawn to
 Old "Ring" - leaping to this side, then to that,
 Of a big, hollow, old oak-tree, which had
 Been blown down by a storm some years before.
 There - all at once - out leapt a lean old fox
 From the black hollow of a big bent limb, - 
 Hey! how he scudded! - but with our old "Ring"
 Sharp after him - and father after "Ring" - 
 We after father, near as we could hold!
 And father noticed that the fox kept just
 About four feet ahead of "Ring" - just that - 
 No farther, and no nearer! Then he said: - 
 "There are young foxes in that tree back there,


 And the mother-fox is drawing 'Ring' and us
 Away from their nest there!" "Oh, le' 's go back! - 
 Do le' 's go back!" we little vandals cried, - 
 "Le' 's go back, quick, and find the little things - 
 Please, father! - Yes, and take 'em home for pets - 
 'Cause 'Ring' he'll kill the old fox anyway!"
 So father turned at last, and back we went,
 And father chopped a hole in the old tree
 About ten feet below the limb from which
 The old fox ran, and - Bless their little lives! - 
 There, in the hollow of the old tree-trunk - 
 There, on a bed of warm dry leaves and moss - 
 There, snug as any bug in any rug - 
 We found - one - two - three - four, and, yes-sir, five
 Wee, weenty-teenty baby-foxes, with
 Their eyes just barely opened - Cute? - my-oh! - 
 The cutest - the most cunning little things
 Two boys ever saw, in all their lives!
 "Raw weather for the little fellows now!"
 Said father, as though talking to himself, - 
 "Raw weather, and no home now!" - And off came
 His warm old "waumus"; and in that he wrapped
 The helpless little animals, and held
 Them soft and warm against him as he could, - 
 And home we happy children followed him. - 
 Old "Ring" did not reach home till nearly dusk:
 The mother-fox had led him a long chase - 

 "Yes, and a fool's chase, too!" he seemed to say,
 And looked ashamed to hear us praising him.
 But, mother - well, we could not understand
 Her acting as she did - and we so pleased!
 I can see yet the look of pained surprise
 And deep compassion of her troubled face
 When father very gently laid his coat,
 With the young foxes in it, on the hearth
 Beside her, as she brightened up the fire.
 She urged - for the old fox's sake and theirs - 
 That they be taken back to the old tree;
 But father - for our wistful sakes, no doubt - 
 Said we would keep them, and would try our best
 To raise them. And at once he set about
 Building a snug home for the little things
 Out of an old big bushel-basket, with
 Its fractured handle and its stoven ribs:
 So, lining and padding this all cosily,
 He snuggled in its little tenants, and
 Called in John Wesley Thomas, our hired man,
 And gave him in full charge, with much advice
 Regarding the just care and sustenance of
 Young foxes. - "John," he said, "you feed 'em milk - 
 Warm milk, John Wesley! Yes, and keep 'em by
 The stove - and keep your stove a-roarin', too,
 Both night and day! - And keep 'em covered up - 
 Not smothered, John, but snug and comfortable. - 


 And now, John Wesley Thomas, first and last, - 
 You feed 'em milk - fresh milk - and always warm - 
 Say five or six or seven times a day - 
 Of course we'll grade that by the way they thrive."
 But, for all sanguine hope, and care, as well,
 The little fellows did not thrive at all. - 
 Indeed, with all our care and vigilance,
 By the third day of their captivity
 The last survivor of the fated five
 Squeaked, like some battered little rubber toy
 Just clean worn out. - And that's just what it was!

 And - nights, - the cry of the mother-fox for her young
 Was heard, with awe, for long weeks afterward.
 And we boys, every night, would go to the door
 And, peering out in the darkness, listening,
 Could hear the poor fox in the black bleak woods
 Still calling for her little ones in vain.
 As, all mutely, we returned to the warm fireside,
 Mother would say: "How would you like for me
 To be out there, this dark night, in the cold woods,
 Calling for my children?"
