---
author: Jean de La Fontaine 
title: The Two Parrots, The King, And His Son.
---

[1]

 Two parrots lived, a sire and son,
 On roastings from a royal fire.
 Two demigods, a son and sire,
 These parrots pension'd for their fun.
 Time tied the knot of love sincere:
 The sires grew to each other dear;
 The sons, in spite of their frivolity,
 Grew comrades boon, in joke and jollity;
 At mess they mated, hot or cool;
 Were fellow-scholars at a school.
 Which did the bird no little honour, since
 The boy, by king begotten, was a prince.
 By nature fond of birds, the prince, too, petted
 A sparrow, which delightfully coquetted.
 These rivals, both of unripe feather,
 One day were frolicking together:
 As oft befalls such little folks,
 A quarrel follow'd from their jokes.
 The sparrow, quite uncircumspect,
 Was by the parrot sadly peck'd;
 With drooping wing and bloody head,
 His master pick'd him up for dead,
 And, being quite too wroth to bear it,
 In heat of passion kill'd his parrot.
 When this sad piece of news he heard,
 Distracted was the parent bird.
 His piercing cries bespoke his pain;
 But cries and tears were all in vain.
 The talking bird had left the shore;[2]
 In short, he, talking now no more,
 Caused such a rage to seize his sire,
 That, lighting on the prince in ire,
 He put out both his eyes,
 And fled for safety as was wise.
 The bird a pine for refuge chose,
 And to its lofty summit rose;
 There, in the bosom of the skies,
 Enjoy'd his vengeance sweet,
 And scorn'd the wrath beneath his feet.
 Out ran the king, and cried, in soothing tone,
 'Return, dear friend; what serves it to bemoan?
 Hate, vengeance, mourning, let us both omit.
 For me, it is no more than fit
 To own, though with an aching heart,
 The wrong is wholly on our part.
 Th' aggressor truly was my son - 
 My son? no; but by Fate the deed was done.
 Ere birth of Time, stern Destiny
 Had written down the sad decree,
 That by this sad calamity
 Your child should cease to live, and mine to see.

 'Let both, then, cease to mourn;
 And you, back to your cage return.'
 'Sire king,' replied the bird,
 'Think you that, after such a deed,
 I ought to trust your word?
 You speak of Fate; by such a heathen creed
 Hope you that I shall be enticed to bleed?
 But whether Fate or Providence divine
 Gives law to things below,
 'Tis writ on high, that on this waving pine,
 Or where wild forests grow,
 My days I finish, safely, far
 From that which ought your love to mar,
 And turn it all to hate.
 Revenge, I know, 's a kingly morsel,
 And ever hath been part and parcel
 Of this your godlike state.
 You would forget the cause of grief;
 Suppose I grant you my belief, - 
 'Tis better still to make it true,
 By keeping out of sight of you.
 Sire king, my friend, no longer wait
 For friendship to be heal'd;....
 But absence is the cure of hate,
 As 'tis from love the shield.'
