---
author: Jean de La Fontaine 
title: The Astrologer Who Stumbled Into A Well.
---

[1]

 To an astrologer who fell
 Plump to the bottom of a well,
 'Poor blockhead!' cried a passer-by,
 'Not see your feet, and read the sky?'

 This upshot of a story will suffice
 To give a useful hint to most;
 For few there are in this our world so wise
 As not to trust in star or ghost,
 Or cherish secretly the creed
 That men the book of destiny may read.
 This book, by Homer and his pupils sung,
 What is it, in plain common sense,
 But what was chance those ancient folks among,
 And with ourselves, God's providence?
 Now chance doth bid defiance
 To every thing like science;
 'Twere wrong, if not,
 To call it hazard, fortune, lot - 
 Things palpably uncertain.
 But from the purposes divine,
 The deep of infinite design,
 Who boasts to lift the curtain?
 Whom but himself doth God allow
 To read his bosom thoughts? and how
 Would he imprint upon the stars sublime
 The shrouded secrets of the night of time?
 And all for what? To exercise the wit
 Of those who on astrology have writ?
 To help us shun inevitable ills?
 To poison for us even pleasure's rills?
 The choicest blessings to destroy,
 Exhausting, ere they come, their joy?
 Such faith is worse than error - 'tis a crime.
 The sky-host moves and marks the course of time;
 The sun sheds on our nicely-measured days
 The glory of his night-dispelling rays;
 And all from this we can divine
 Is, that they need to rise and shine, - 
 To roll the seasons, ripen fruits,
 And cheer the hearts of men and brutes.
 How tallies this revolving universe
 With human things, eternally diverse?
 Ye horoscopers, waning quacks,
 Please turn on Europe's courts your backs,
 And, taking on your travelling lists
 The bellows-blowing alchemists,
 Budge off together to the land of mists.
 But I've digress'd. Return we now, bethinking
 Of our poor star-man, whom we left a drinking.
 Besides the folly of his lying trade,
 This man the type may well be made
 Of those who at chimeras stare
 When they should mind the things that are.
