---
author: Jean de La Fontaine 
title: The Man Who Ran After Fortune, And The Man Who Waited For Her In His Bed.
---

 Who joins not with his restless race
 To give Dame Fortune eager chase?
 O, had I but some lofty perch,
 From which to view the panting crowd
 Of care-worn dreamers, poor and proud,
 As on they hurry in the search,
 From realm to realm, o'er land and water,
 Of Fate's fantastic, fickle daughter!
 Ah! slaves sincere of flying phantom!
 Just as their goddess they would clasp,
 The jilt divine eludes their grasp,
 And flits away to Bantam!
 Poor fellows! I bewail their lot.
 And here's the comfort of my ditty;
 For fools the mark of wrath are not
 So much, I'm sure, as pity.
 'That man,' say they, and feed their hope,
 'Raised cabbages - and now he's pope.
 Don't we deserve as rich a prize?'
 Ay, richer? But, hath Fortune eyes?
 And then the popedom, is it worth
 The price that must be given? - 
 Repose? - the sweetest bliss of earth,
 And, ages since, of gods in heaven?
 'Tis rarely Fortune's favourites
 Enjoy this cream of all delights.
 Seek not the dame, and she will you - 
 A truth which of her sex is true.

 Snug in a country town
 A pair of friends were settled down.
 One sigh'd unceasingly to find
 A fortune better to his mind,
 And, as he chanced his friend to meet,
 Proposed to quit their dull retreat.
 'No prophet can to honour come,'
 Said he, 'unless he quits his home;
 Let's seek our fortune far and wide.'
 'Seek, if you please,' his friend replied:
 'For one, I do not wish to see
 A better clime or destiny.
 I leave the search and prize to you;
 Your restless humour please pursue!
 You'll soon come back again.
 I vow to nap it here till then.'
 The enterprising, or ambitious,
 Or, if you please, the avaricious,
 Betook him to the road.
 The morrow brought him to a place
 The flaunting goddess ought to grace
 As her particular abode - 
 I mean the court - whereat he staid,
 And plans for seizing Fortune laid.
 He rose, and dress'd, and dined, and went to bed,
 Exactly as the fashion led:
 In short, he did whate'er he could,
 But never found the promised good.
 Said he, 'Now somewhere else I'll try - 
 And yet I fail'd I know not why;
 For Fortune here is much at home
 To this and that I see her come,
 Astonishingly kind to some.
 And, truly, it is hard to see
 The reason why she slips from me.
 'Tis true, perhaps, as I've been told,
 That spirits here may be too bold.
 To courts and courtiers all I bid adieu;
 Deceitful shadows they pursue.
 The dame has temples in Surat;
 I'll go and see them - that is flat.'
 To say so was t' embark at once.
 O, human hearts are made of bronze!
 His must have been of adamant,
 Beyond the power of Death to daunt,
 Who ventured first this route to try,
 And all its frightful risks defy.
 'Twas more than once our venturous wight
 Did homeward turn his aching sight,
 When pirate's, rocks, and calms and storms,
 Presented death in frightful forms - 
 Death sought with pains on distant shores,
 Which soon as wish'd for would have come,
 Had he not left the peaceful doors
 Of his despised but blessed home.
 Arrived, at length, in Hindostan,
 The people told our wayward man
 That Fortune, ever void of plan,
 Dispensed her favours in Japan.
 And on he went, the weary sea
 His vessel bearing lazily.
 This lesson, taught by savage men,
 Was after all his only gain: - 
 Contented in thy country stay,
 And seek thy wealth in nature's way.
 Japan refused to him, no less
 Than Hindostan, success;
 And hence his judgment came to make
 His quitting home a great mistake.
 Renouncing his ungrateful course,
 He hasten'd back with all his force;
 And when his village came in sight,
 His tears were proof of his delight.
 'Ah, happy he,' exclaimed the wight,
 'Who, dwelling there with mind sedate,
 Employs himself to regulate
 His ever-hatching, wild desires;
 Who checks his heart when it aspires
 To know of courts, and seas, and glory,
 More than he can by simple story;
 Who seeks not o'er the treacherous wave - 
 More treacherous Fortune's willing slave - 
 The bait of wealth and honours fleeting,
 Held by that goddess, aye retreating.
 Henceforth from home I budge no more!'
 Pop on his sleeping friends he came,
 Thus purposing against the dame,
 And found her sitting at his door.[1]
