---
author: Madison Julius Cawein 
title: Loveliness.
---

I.

 When I fare forth to kiss the eyes of Spring,
On ways, which arch gold sunbeams and pearl buds
 Embraced, two whispers we search - wandering
By goblin forests and by girlish floods
Deep in the hermit-holy solitudes - 
 For stalwart Dryads romping in a ring;
Firm limbs an oak-bark-brown, and hair - wild woods
 Have perfumed - loops of radiance; and they,
Most coyly pleasant, as we linger by,
Pout dimpled cheeks, more rose than rosiest sky,
 Honeyed; and us good-hearted laughter fling
 Like far-out reefs that flute melodious spray.


II.

 Then we surprise each Naiad ere she slips - 
Nude at her toilette - in her fountain's glass,
 With damp locks dewy, and large godlike hips
Cool-glittering; but discovered, when - alas!
From green, indented moss and plushy grass, - 
 Her great eyes' pansy-black reproaching, - dips
She white the cloven waters ere we pass:
 And a broad, orbing ripple makes to hide
From our desirous gaze provoked what path
She gleaming took; what haunt she bashful hath
 In minnowy freshness, where her murmurous lips
 Bubbling make merry 'neath the rocky tide.


III.

 Oft do we meet the Oread whose eyes
Are dew-drops where twin heavens shine confessed;
 She, all the maiden modesty's surprise
Blushing her temples, - to deep loins and breast
Tempestuous, brown bewildering tresses pressed, - 
 Stands one scared moment's moiety, in wise
Of some delicious dream, then shrinks distressed,
 Like some weak wind that, haply heard, is gone,
In rapport with shy Silence to make sound;
So, like storm sunlight, bares clean limbs to bound
 A thistle's flashing to a woody rise,
 A graceful glimmer up the ferny lawn.


IV.

 Hear Satyrs and Sylvanus in sad shades
Of dozy dells pipe: Pan and Fauns hark dance
 With rattling hoofs dim in low, mottled glades:
Hidden in spice-bush-bowered banks, perchance,
Mark Slyness waiting with an animal glance
 The advent of some Innocence, who wades
Thro' thigh-deep flowers, naked as Romance,
 In braided shadows, when two hairy arms
Hug her unconscious beauty panting white;
Till tearful terror, struggling into might,
 Beats the brute brow resisting; yields and fades,
 Exhausted, to the grim Lust her rich charms.

