---
author: Robert William Service 
title: My Mate
---

 I've been sittin' starin', starin' at 'is muddy pair of boots,
 And tryin' to convince meself it's 'im.
 (Look out there, lad! That sniper - 'e's a dysey when 'e shoots;
 'E'll be layin' of you out the same as Jim.)
 Jim as lies there in the dug-out wiv 'is blanket round 'is 'ead,
 To keep 'is brains from mixin' wiv the mud;
 And 'is face as white as putty, and 'is overcoat all red,
 Like 'e's spilt a bloomin' paint-pot - but it's blood.

 And I'm tryin' to remember of a time we wasn't pals.
 'Ow often we've played 'ookey, 'im and me;
 And sometimes it was music-'alls, and sometimes it was gals,
 And even there we 'ad no disagree.
 For when 'e copped Mariar Jones, the one I liked the best,
 I shook 'is 'and and loaned 'im 'arf a quid;
 I saw 'im through the parson's job, I 'elped 'im make 'is nest,
 I even stood god-farther to the kid.

 So when the war broke out, sez 'e: "Well, wot abaht it, Joe?"
 "Well, wot abaht it, lad?" sez I to 'im.
 'Is missis made a awful fuss, but 'e was mad to go,
 ('E always was 'igh-sperrited was Jim).
 Well, none of it's been 'eaven, and the most of it's been 'ell,
 But we've shared our baccy, and we've 'alved our bread.
 We'd all the luck at Wipers, and we shaved through Noove Chapelle,
 And . . . that snipin' barstard gits 'im on the 'ead.

 Now wot I wants to know is, why it wasn't me was took?
 I've only got meself, 'e stands for three.
 I'm plainer than a louse, while 'e was 'andsome as a dook;
 'E always was a better man than me.
 'E was goin' 'ome next Toosday; 'e was 'appy as a lark,
 And 'e'd just received a letter from 'is kid;
 And 'e struck a match to show me, as we stood there in the dark,
 When . . . that bleedin' bullet got 'im on the lid.

 'E was killed so awful sudden that 'e 'adn't time to die.
 'E sorto jumped, and came down wiv a thud.
 Them corpsy-lookin' star-shells kept a-streamin' in the sky,
 And there 'e lay like nothin' in the mud.
 And there 'e lay so quiet wiv no mansard to 'is 'ead,
 And I'm sick, and blamed if I can understand:
 The pots of 'alf and 'alf we've 'ad, and ZIP! like that - 'e's dead,
 Wiv the letter of 'is nipper in 'is 'and.

 There's some as fights for freedom and there's some as fights for fun,
 But me, my lad, I fights for bleedin' 'ate.
 You can blame the war and blast it, but I 'opes it won't be done
 Till I gets the bloomin' blood-price for me mate.
 It'll take a bit o' bayonet to level up for Jim;
 Then if I'm spared I think I'll 'ave a bid,
 Wiv 'er that was Mariar Jones to take the place of 'im,
 To sorter be a farther to 'is kid.
