---
author: Robert William Service 
title: The Song of the Soldier-born
---

Give me the scorn of the stars and a peak defiant;
Wail of the pines and a wind with the shout of a giant;
Night and a trail unknown and a heart reliant.

 Give me to live and love in the old, bold fashion;
 A soldier's billet at night and a soldier's ration;
 A heart that leaps to the fight with a soldier's passion.

 For I hold as a simple faith there's no denying:
 The trade of a soldier's the only trade worth plying;
 The death of a soldier's the only death worth dying.

 So let me go and leave your safety behind me;
 Go to the spaces of hazard where nothing shall bind me;
 Go till the word is War - and then you will find me.

 Then you will call me and claim me because you will need me;
 Cheer me and gird me and into the battle-wrath speed me. . . .
 And when it's over, spurn me and no longer heed me.

 For guile and a purse gold-greased are the arms you carry;
 With deeds of paper you fight and with pens you parry;
 You call on the hounds of the law your foes to harry.

 You with your "Art for its own sake", posing and prinking;
 You with your "Live and be merry", eating and drinking;
 You with your "Peace at all hazard", from bright blood shrinking.

 Fools! I will tell you now: though the red rain patters,
 And a million of men go down, it's little it matters. . . .
 There's the Flag upflung to the stars, though it streams in tatters.

 There's a glory gold never can buy to yearn and to cry for;
 There's a hope that's as old as the sky to suffer and sigh for;
 There's a faith that out-dazzles the sun to martyr and die for.

 Ah no! it's my dream that War will never be ended;
 That men will perish like men, and valour be splendid;
 That the Flag by the sword will be served, and honour defended.

 That the tale of my fights will never be ancient story;
 That though my eye may be dim and my beard be hoary,
 I'll die as a soldier dies on the Field of Glory.

So give me a strong right arm for a wrong's swift righting;
Stave of a song on my lips as my sword is smiting;
Death in my boots may-be, but fighting, fighting.
