---
author: Thomas Frederick Young 
title: A Sunset.
---

"Oh come," said I unto my love,
 "And let us view the setting sun,
And watch the fleeting clouds above,
 So brightly color'd, ev'ry one."

Thus lightly to my love, I spake,
 And she responded lightly, too,
And by my side her place did take,
 Her young heart gladden'd by the view.

I walk'd along, she tripp'd beside,
 Short was the time, until we stood
Above the rolling, glassy tide - 
 Above old Huron's mighty flood.

"Oh, see," said I, "the glorious sight,
 Now spread before our favor'd gaze - 
The clouds all flame, the sea all light,
 The sun, one grand, terrific blaze."

E'en such a time, and such a scene
 Could not love's gentle pow'r dispel.
I saw my love's grave, thoughtful mien,
 I turn'd and said: "your thoughts pray tell."

"My thoughts! Oh yes, since you request,
 My thoughts were centr'd all in you,
As chang'd my gaze from crest to crest,
 Across the glassy ocean's blue;

"And, as I saw the waters shine
 With polish'd splendor from the sun,
Thus gleam'd, I thought, this love of mine,
 Thus shall it gleam till life is done.

"And, as I saw the bars of gold,
 And clouds with crimson deeply dy'd,
Your love, I thought, was wealth untold,
 And my heart's blood, your crimson tide."

"And yours," I said, "your love to me
 Is one great, shining, glassy flood;
Your face, reflected, there I see,
 So beautiful, so bright and good.

"My nature glows at thy dear name,
 With deep, red heat, like yonder ball,
It shines with constant, ruddy flame;
 It shines for you, but tinges all.

"But see, the sun has sunk to rest,
 As if beneath the distant wave,
But still the colors in the west,
 Show that he still shines from his grave.

"And thus, my love, when I shall sink
 Into the dark and dread Unknown,
'Tis surely just for us to think,
 Some rays shall shine for thee alone.

"And if it be my fate to stay,
 While thou shalt calmly sink to rest,
'Tis surely right for me to say,
 Some light from thee shall cheer my breast."
