---
author: W.J. Turner 
title: Death
---

When I am dead a few poor souls shall grieve
As I grieved for my brother long ago.
 Scarce did my eyes grow dim,
 I had forgotten him;
I was far-off hearing the spring winds blow,
 And many summers burned
When, though still reeling with my eyes aflame,
 I heard that faded name
Whispered one Spring amid the hurrying world
 From which, years gone, he turned.

I looked up at my windows and I saw
The trees, thin spectres sucked forth by the moon.
 The air was very still
 Above a distant hill;
It was the hour of night's full silver moon.
 'O are thou there my brother?' my soul cried;
And all the pale stars down bright rivers wept,
 As my heart sadly crept
About the empty hills, bathed in that light
 That lapped him when he died.

Ah! it was cold, so cold; do I not know
How dead my heart on that remembered day!
 Clear in a far-away place
 I see his delicate face
Just as he called me from my solitary play,
 Giving into my hands a tiny tree.
We planted it in the dark, blossomless ground
 Gravely, without a sound;
Then back I went and left him standing by
 His birthday gift to me.

In that far land perchance it quietly grows
Drinking the rain, making a pleasant shade;
 Birds in its branches fly
 Out of the fathomless sky
Where worlds of circling light arise and fade.
 Blindly it quivers in the bright flood of day,
Or drowned in multitudinous shouts of rain
 Glooms o'er the dark-veiled plain -
Buried below, the ghost that's in his bones
 Dreams in the sodden clay.

And, while he faded, drunk with beauty's eyes
I kissed bright girls and laughed deep in dumb trees,
 That stared fixt in the air
 Like madmen in despair
Gaped up from earth with the escaping breeze.
 I saw earth's exaltation slowly creep
Out of their myriad sky-embracing veins.
 I laughed along the lanes,
Meeting Death riding in from the hollow seas
 Through black-wreathed woods asleep.

I laughed, I swaggered on the cold hard ground -
Through the grey air trembled a falling wave -
 'Thou'rt pale, O Death!' I cried,
 Mocking him in my pride;
And passing I dreamed not of that lonely grave,
But of leaf-maidens whose pale, moon-like hands
Above the tree-foam waved in the icy air,
 Sweeping with shining hair
Through the green-tinted sky, one moment fled
 Out of immortal lands.

One windless Autumn night the Moon came out
In a white sea of cloud, a field of snow;
 In darkness shaped of trees,
 I sank upon my knees
And watched her shining, from the small wood below -
 Faintly Death flickered in an owl's far cry - -
We floated soundless in the great gulf of space,
 Her light upon my face -
Immortal, shining in that dark wood I knelt
 And knew I could not die.

And knew I could not die - O Death, didst thou
Heed my vain glory, standing pale by thy dead?
 There is a spirit who grieves
 Amid earth's dying leaves;
Was't thou that wept beside my brother's bed?
 For I did never mourn nor heed at all
Him passing on his temporal elm-wood bier;
 I never shed a tear.
The drooping sky spread grey-winged through my soul,
 While stones and earth did fall.

That sound rings down the years - I hear it yet -
All earthly life's a winding funeral -
 And though I never wept,
 But into the dark coach stept,
Dreaming by night to answer the blood's sweet call,
 She who stood there, high-breasted, with small, wise lips,
And gave me wine to drink and bread to eat,
 Has not more steadfast feet,
But fades from my arms as fade from mariners' eyes
 The sea's most beauteous ships.

The trees and hills of earth were once as close
As my own brother, they are becoming dreams
 And shadows in my eyes;
 More dimly lies
Guaya deep in my soul, the coastline gleams
 Faintly along the darkening crystalline seas.
Glimmering and lovely still, 'twill one day go;
 The surging dark will flow
Over my hopes and joys, and blot out all
 Earth's hills and skies and trees.

I shall look up one night and see the Moon
For the last time shining above the hills,
 And thou, silent, wilt ride
 Over the dark hillside.
'Twill be, perchance, the time of daffodils -
 _'How come those bright immortals in the woods?
Their joy being young, didst thou not drag them all
 Into dark graves ere Fall?'_
Shall life thus haunt me, wondering, as I go
 To thy deep solitudes?

There is a figure with a down-turned torch
Carved on a pillar in an olden time,
 A calm and lovely boy
 Who comes not to destroy
But to lead age back to its golden prime.
 Thus did an antique sculptor draw thee, Death,
With smooth and beauteous brow and faint sweet smile,
 Not haggard, gaunt and vile,
And thou perhaps art thus to whom men may,
 Unvexed, give up their breath.

But in my soul thou sittest like a dream
Among earth's mountains, by her dim-coloured seas;
 A wild unearthly Shape
 In thy dark-glimmering cape,
Piping a tune of wavering melodies,
 Thou sittest, ay, thou sittest at the feast
Of my brief life among earth's bright-wreathed flowers,
 Staining the dancing hours
With sombre gleams until, abrupt, thou risest
And all, at once, is ceased.

