---
author: William Wordsworth 
title: The Redbreast - Suggested In A Westmoreland Cottage
---

 Driven in by Autumn's sharpening air
 From half-stripped woods and pastures bare,
 Brisk Robin seeks a kindlier home:
 Not like a beggar is he come,
 But enters as a looked-for guest,
 Confiding in his ruddy breast,
 As if it were a natural shield
 Charged with a blazon on the field,
 Due to that good and pious deed
 Of which we in the Ballad read.
 But pensive fancies putting by,
 And wild-wood sorrows, speedily
 He plays the expert ventriloquist;
 And, caught by glimpses now, now missed,
 Puzzles the listener with a doubt
 If the soft voice he throws about
 Comes from within doors or without!
 Was ever such a sweet confusion,
 Sustained by delicate illusion?
 He's at your elbow, to your feeling
 The notes are from the floor or ceiling;
 And there's a riddle to be guessed,
 'Till you have marked his heaving chest,
 And busy throat whose sink and swell,
 Betray the Elf that loves to dwell
 In Robin's bosom, as a chosen cell.
 
 Heart-pleased we smile upon the Bird
 If seen, and with like pleasure stirred
 Commend him, when he's only heard.
 But small and fugitive our gain
 Compared with 'hers' who long hath lain,
 With languid limbs and patient head
 Reposing on a lone sick-bed;
 Where now, she daily hears a strain
 That cheats her of too busy cares,
 Eases her pain, and helps her prayers.
 And who but this dear Bird beguiled
 The fever of that pale-faced Child;
 Now cooling, with his passing wing,
 Her forehead, like a breeze of Spring:
 Recalling now, with descant soft
 Shed round her pillow from aloft,
 Sweet thoughts of angels hovering nigh,
 And the invisible sympathy
 Of "Matthew, Mark, and Luke, and John,
 Blessing the bed she lies upon"?
 And sometimes, just as listening ends
 In slumber, with the cadence blends
 A dream of that low-warbled hymn
 Which old folk, fondly pleased to trim
 Lamps of faith, now burning dim,
 Say that the Cherubs carved in stone,
 When clouds gave way at dead of night
 And the ancient church was filled with light,
 Used to sing in heavenly tone,
 Above and round the sacred places
 They guard, with winged baby-faces.
 
 Thrice happy Creature! in all lands
 Nurtured by hospitable hands:
 Free entrance to this cot has he,
 Entrance and exit both 'yet' free;
 And, when the keen unruffled weather
 That thus brings man and bird together,
 Shall with its pleasantness be past,
 And casement closed and door made fast,
 To keep at bay the howling blast,
 'He' needs not fear the season's rage,
 For the whole house is Robin's cage.
 Whether the bird flit here or there,
 O'er table 'lilt', or perch on chair,
 Though some may frown and make a stir,
 To scare him as a trespasser,
 And he belike will flinch or start,
 Good friends he has to take his part;
 One chiefly, who with voice and look
 Pleads for him from the chimney-nook,
 Where sits the Dame, and wears away
 Her long and vacant holiday;
 With images about her heart,
 Reflected from the years gone by,
 On human nature's second infancy.
 
