---
author: William Wordsworth 
title: The Excursion - Book Sixth - The Churchyard Among The Mountains
---

 Hail to the crown by Freedom shaped to gird
 An English Sovereign's brow! and to the throne
 Whereon he sits! Whose deep foundations lie
 In veneration and the people's love;
 Whose steps are equity, whose seat is law.
 Hail to the State of England! And conjoin
 With this a salutation as devout,
 Made to the spiritual fabric of her Church;
 Founded in truth; by blood of Martyrdom
 Cemented; by the hands of Wisdom reared
 In beauty of holiness, with ordered pomp,
 Decent and unreproved. The voice, that greets
 The majesty of both, shall pray for both;
 That, mutually protected and sustained,
 They may endure long as the sea surrounds
 This favoured Land, or sunshine warms her soil.

 And O, ye swelling hills, and spacious plains
 Besprent from shore to shore with steeple-towers,
 And spires whose 'silent finger points to heaven;'
 Nor wanting, at wide intervals, the bulk
 Of ancient minster lifted above the cloud
 Of the dense air, which town or city breeds
 To intercept the sun's glad beams may ne'er
 That true succession fail of English hearts,
 Who, with ancestral feeling, can perceive
 What in those holy structures ye possess
 Of ornamental interest, and the charm
 Of pious sentiment diffused afar,
 And human charity, and social love.
 Thus never shall the indignities of time
 Approach their reverend graces, unopposed;
 Nor shall the elements be free to hurt
 Their fair proportions; nor the blinder rage
 Of bigot zeal madly to overturn;
 And, if the desolating hand of war
 Spare them, they shall continue to bestow
 Upon the thronged abodes of busy men
 (Depraved, and ever prone to fill the mind
 Exclusively with transitory things)
 An air and mien of dignified pursuit;
 Of sweet civility, on rustic wilds.

 The Poet, fostering for his native land
 Such hope, entreats that servants may abound
 Of those pure altars worthy; ministers
 Detached from pleasure, to the love of gain
 Superior, insusceptible of pride,
 And by ambitious longings undisturbed;
 Men, whose delight is where their duty leads
 Or fixes them; whose least distinguished day
 Shines with some portion of that heavenly lustre
 Which makes the sabbath lovely in the sight
 Of blessed angels, pitying human cares.
 And, as on earth it is the doom of truth
 To be perpetually attacked by foes
 Open or covert, be that priesthood still,
 For her defence, replenished with a band
 Of strenuous champions, in scholastic arts
 Thoroughly disciplined; nor (if in course
 Of the revolving world's disturbances
 Cause should recur, which righteous Heaven avert!
 To meet such trial) from their spiritual sires
 Degenerate; who, constrained to wield the sword
 Of disputation, shrunk not, though assailed
 With hostile din, and combating in sight
 Of angry umpires, partial and unjust;
 And did, thereafter, bathe their hands in fire,
 So to declare the conscience satisfied:
 Nor for their bodies would accept release;
 But, blessing God and praising him, bequeathed
 With their last breath, from out the smouldering flame,
 The faith which they by diligence had earned,
 Or, through illuminating grace, received,
 For their dear countrymen, and all mankind.
 O high example, constancy divine!

 Even such a Man (inheriting the zeal
 And from the sanctity of elder times
 Not deviating, a priest, the like of whom
 If multiplied, and in their stations set,
 Would o'er the bosom of a joyful land
 Spread true religion and her genuine fruits)
 Before me stood that day; on holy ground
 Fraught with the relics of mortality,
 Exalting tender themes, by just degrees
 To lofty raised; and to the highest, last;
 The head and mighty paramount of truths,
 Immortal life, in never-fading worlds,
 For mortal creatures, conquered and secured.

 That basis laid, those principles of faith
 Announced, as a preparatory act
 Of reverence done to the spirit of the place,
 The Pastor cast his eyes upon the ground;
 Not, as before, like one oppressed with awe
 But with a mild and social cheerfulness;
 Then to the Solitary turned, and spake.

 "At morn or eve, in your retired domain,
 Perchance you not unfrequently have marked
 A Visitor in quest of herbs and flowers;
 Too delicate employ, as would appear,
 For one, who, though of drooping mien, had yet
 From nature's kindliness received a frame
 Robust as ever rural labour bred."

 The Solitary answered: "Such a Form
 Full well I recollect. We often crossed
 Each other's path; but, as the Intruder seemed
 Fondly to prize the silence which he kept,
 And I as willingly did cherish mine,
 We met, and passed, like shadows. I have heard,
 From my good Host, that being crazed in brain
 By unrequited love, he scaled the rocks,
 Dived into caves, and pierced the matted woods,
 In hope to find some virtuous herb of power
 To cure his malady!"
 The Vicar smiled,
 "Alas! before to-morrow's sun goes down
 His habitation will be here: for him
 That open grave is destined."
 "Died he then
 Of pain and grief?" the Solitary asked,
 "Do not believe it; never could that be!"

 "He loved," the Vicar answered, "deeply loved,
 Loved fondly, truly, fervently; and dared
 At length to tell his love, but sued in vain;
 Rejected, yea repelled; and, if with scorn
 Upon the haughty maiden's brow, 'tis but
 A high-prized plume which female Beauty wears
 In wantonness of conquest, or puts on
 To cheat the world, or from herself to hide
 Humiliation, when no longer free.
 'That' he could brook, and glory in; but when
 The tidings came that she whom he had wooed
 Was wedded to another, and his heart
 Was forced to rend away its only hope;
 Then, Pity could have scarcely found on earth
 An object worthier of regard than he,
 In the transition of that bitter hour!
 Lost was she, lost; nor could the Sufferer say
 That in the act of preference he had been
 Unjustly dealt with; but the Maid was gone!
 Had vanished from his prospects and desires;
 Not by translation to the heavenly choir
 Who have put off their mortal spoils ah no!
 She lives another's wishes to complete,
 'Joy be their lot, and happiness,' he cried,
 'His lot and hers, as misery must be mine!'

 Such was that strong concussion; but the Man,
 Who trembled, trunk and limbs, like some huge oak
 By a fierce tempest shaken, soon resumed
 The stedfast quiet natural to a mind
 Of composition gentle and sedate,
 And, in its movements, circumspect and slow.
 To books, and to the long-forsaken desk,
 O'er which enchained by science he had loved
 To bend, he stoutly re-addressed himself,
 Resolved to quell his pain, and search for truth
 With keener appetite (if that might be)
 And closer industry. Of what ensued
 Within the heart no outward sign appeared
 Till a betraying sickliness was seen
 To tinge his cheek; and through his frame it crept
 With slow mutation unconcealable;
 Such universal change as autumn makes
 In the fair body of a leafy grove,
 Discoloured, then divested.
 'Tis affirmed
 By poets skilled in nature's secret ways
 That Love will not submit to be controlled
 By mastery: and the good Man lacked not friends
 Who strove to instil this truth into his mind,
 A mind in all heart-mysteries unversed.
 'Go to the hills,' said one, 'remit a while
 'This baneful diligence: at early morn
 'Court the fresh air, explore the heaths and woods;
 'And, leaving it to others to foretell,
 'By calculations sage, the ebb and flow
 'Of tides, and when the moon will be eclipsed,
 'Do you, for your own benefit, construct
 'A calendar of flowers, plucked as they blow
 'Where health abides, and cheerfulness, and peace.'
 The attempt was made; 'tis needless to report
 How hopelessly; but innocence is strong,
 And an entire simplicity of mind
 A thing most sacred in the eye of Heaven;
 That opens, for such sufferers, relief
 Within the soul, fountains of grace divine;
 And doth commend their weakness and disease
 To Nature's care, assisted in her office
 By all the elements that round her wait
 To generate, to preserve, and to restore;
 And by her beautiful array of forms
 Shedding sweet influence from above; or pure
 Delight exhaling from the ground they tread."

 "Impute it not to impatience, if," exclaimed
 The Wanderer, "I infer that he was healed
 By perseverance in the course prescribed."

 "You do not err: the powers, that had been lost
 By slow degrees, were gradually regained;
 The fluttering nerves composed; the beating heart
 In rest established; and the jarring thoughts
 To harmony restored. But yon dark mould
 Will cover him, in the fulness of his strength,
 Hastily smitten by a fever's force;
 Yet not with stroke so sudden as refused
 Time to look back with tenderness on her
 Whom he had loved in passion; and to send
 Some farewell words with one, but one, request;
 That, from his dying hand, she would accept
 Of his possessions that which most he prized;
 A book, upon whose leaves some chosen plants,
 By his own hand disposed with nicest care,
 In undecaying beauty were preserved;
 Mute register, to him, of time and place,
 And various fluctuations in the breast;
 To her, a monument of faithful love
 Conquered, and in tranquillity retained!

 Close to his destined habitation, lies
 One who achieved a humbler victory,
 Though marvellous in its kind. A place there is
 High in these mountains, that allured a band
 Of keen adventurers to unite their pains
 In search of precious ore: they tried, were foiled
 And all desisted, all, save him alone.
 He, taking counsel of his own clear thoughts,
 And trusting only to his own weak hands,
 Urged unremittingly the stubborn work,
 Unseconded, uncountenanced; then, as time
 Passed on, while still his lonely efforts found
 No recompense, derided; and at length,
 By many pitied, as insane of mind;
 By others dreaded as the luckless thrall
 Of subterranean Spirits feeding hope
 By various mockery of sight and sound;
 Hope after hope, encouraged and destroyed.
 But when the lord of seasons had matured
 The fruits of earth through space of twice ten years,
 The mountain's entrails offered to his view
 And trembling grasp the long-deferred reward.
 Not with more transport did Columbus greet
 A world, his rich discovery! But our Swain,
 A very hero till his point was gained,
 Proved all unable to support the weight
 Of prosperous fortune. On the fields he looked
 With an unsettled liberty of thought,
 Wishes and endless schemes; by daylight walked
 Giddy and restless; ever and anon
 Quaffed in his gratitude immoderate cups;
 And truly might be said to die of joy!
 He vanished; but conspicuous to this day
 The path remains that linked his cottage-door
 To the mine's mouth; a long and slanting track,
 Upon the rugged mountain's stony side,
 Worn by his daily visits to and from
 The darksome centre of a constant hope.
 This vestige, neither force of beating rain,
 Nor the vicissitudes of frost and thaw
 Shall cause to fade, till ages pass away;
 And it is named, in memory of the event,
 The PATH OF PERSEVERANCE."
 "Thou from whom
 Man has his strength," exclaimed the Wanderer, "oh!
 Do thou direct it! To the virtuous grant
 The penetrative eye which can perceive
 In this blind world the guiding vein of hope;
 That, like this Labourer, such may dig their way,
 'Unshaken, unseduced, unterrified;'
 Grant to the wise 'his' firmness of resolve!"

 "That prayer were not superfluous," said the Priest,
 "Amid the noblest relics, proudest dust,
 That Westminster, for Britain's glory, holds
 Within the bosom of her awful pile,
 Ambitiously collected. Yet the sigh,
 Which wafts that prayer to heaven, is due to all,
 Wherever laid, who living fell below
 Their virtue's humbler mark; a sigh of 'pain'
 If to the opposite extreme they sank.
 How would you pity her who yonder rests;
 Him, farther off; the pair, who here are laid;
 But, above all, that mixture of earth's mould
 Whom sight of this green hillock to my mind
 Recalls!
 'He' lived not till his locks were nipped
 By seasonable frost of age; nor died
 Before his temples, prematurely forced
 To mix the manly brown with silver grey,
 Gave obvious instance of the sad effect
 Produced, when thoughtless Folly hath usurped
 The natural crown that sage Experience wears.
 Gay, volatile, ingenious, quick to learn,
 And prompt to exhibit all that he possessed
 Or could perform; a zealous actor, hired
 Into the troop of mirth, a soldier, sworn
 Into the lists of giddy enterprise
 Such was he; yet, as if within his frame
 Two several souls alternately had lodged,
 Two sets of manners could the Youth put on;
 And, fraught with antics as the Indian bird
 That writhes and chatters in her wiry cage,
 Was graceful, when it pleased him, smooth and still
 As the mute swan that floats adown the stream,
 Or, on the waters of the unruffled lake,
 Anchors her placid beauty. Not a leaf,
 That flutters on the bough, lighter than he;
 And not a flower, that droops in the green shade,
 More winningly reserved! If ye enquire
 How such consummate elegance was bred
 Amid these wilds, this answer may suffice;
 'Twas Nature's will; who sometimes undertakes,
 For the reproof of human vanity,
 Art to outstrip in her peculiar walk.
 Hence, for this Favourite lavishly endowed
 With personal gifts, and bright instinctive wit,
 While both, embellishing each other, stood
 Yet farther recommended by the charm
 Of fine demeanour, and by dance and song,
 And skill in letters every fancy shaped
 Fair expectations; nor, when to the world's
 Capacious field forth went the Adventurer, there
 Were he and his attainments overlooked,
 Or scantily rewarded; but all hopes,
 Cherished for him, he suffered to depart,
 Like blighted buds; or clouds that mimicked land
 Before the sailor's eye; or diamond drops
 That sparkling decked the morning grass; or aught
 That 'was' attractive, and hath ceased to be!

 Yet, when this Prodigal returned, the rites
 Of joyful greeting were on him bestowed,
 Who, by humiliation undeterred,
 Sought for his weariness a place of rest
 Within his Father's gates. Whence came he? clothed
 In tattered garb, from hovels where abides
 Necessity, the stationary host
 Of vagrant poverty; from rifted barns
 Where no one dwells but the wide-staring owl
 And the owl's prey; from these bare haunts, to which
 He had descended from the proud saloon,
 He came, the ghost of beauty and of health,
 The wreck of gaiety! But soon revived
 In strength, in power refitted, he renewed
 His suit to Fortune; and she smiled again
 Upon a fickle Ingrate. Thrice he rose,
 Thrice sank as willingly. For he whose nerves
 Were used to thrill with pleasure, while his voice
 Softly accompanied the tuneful harp,
 By the nice finger of fair ladies touched
 In glittering halls was able to derive
 No less enjoyment from an abject choice.
 Who happier for the moment who more blithe
 Than this fallen Spirit? in those dreary holds
 His talents lending to exalt the freaks
 Of merry-making beggars, nor provoked
 To laughter multiplied in louder peals
 By his malicious wit; then, all enchained
 With mute astonishment, themselves to see
 In their own arts outdone, their fame eclipsed,
 As by the very presence of the Fiend
 Who dictates and inspires illusive feats,
 For knavish purposes! The city, too,
 (With shame I speak it) to her guilty bowers
 Allured him, sunk so low in self-respect
 As there to linger, there to eat his bread,
 Hired minstrel of voluptuous blandishment;
 Charming the air with skill of hand or voice,
 Listen who would, be wrought upon who might,
 Sincerely wretched hearts, or falsely gay.
 Such the too frequent tenor of his boast
 In ears that relished the report; but all
 Was from his Parents happily concealed;
 Who saw enough for blame and pitying love.
 They also were permitted to receive
 His last, repentant breath; and closed his eyes,
 No more to open on that irksome world
 Where he had long existed in the state
 Of a young fowl beneath one mother hatched,
 Though from another sprung, different in kind:
 Where he had lived, and could not cease to live,
 Distracted in propensity; content
 With neither element of good or ill;
 And yet in both rejoicing; man unblest;
 Of contradictions infinite the slave,
 Till his deliverance, when Mercy made him
 One with himself, and one with them that sleep."

 "'Tis strange," observed the Solitary, "strange
 It seems, and scarcely less than pitiful,
 That in a land where charity provides
 For all that can no longer feed themselves,
 A man like this should choose to bring his shame
 To the parental door; and with his sighs
 Infect the air which he had freely breathed
 In happy infancy. He could not pine,
 Through lack of converse; no he must have found
 Abundant exercise for thought and speech,
 In his dividual being, self-reviewed,
 Self-catechised, self-punished. Some there are
 Who, drawing near their final home, and much
 And daily longing that the same were reached,
 Would rather shun than seek the fellowship
 Of kindred mould. Such haply here are laid?"

 "Yes," said the Priest, "the Genius of our hills
 Who seems, by these stupendous barriers cast
 Round his domain, desirous not alone
 To keep his own, but also to exclude
 All other progeny doth sometimes lure,
 Even by his studied depth of privacy,
 The unhappy alien hoping to obtain
 Concealment, or seduced by wish to find,
 In place from outward molestation free,
 Helps to internal ease. Of many such
 Could I discourse; but as their stay was brief,
 So their departure only left behind
 Fancies, and loose conjectures. Other trace
 Survives, for worthy mention, of a pair
 Who, from the pressure of their several fates,
 Meeting as strangers, in a petty town
 Whose blue roofs ornament a distant reach
 Of this far-winding vale, remained as friends
 True to their choice; and gave their bones in trust
 To this loved cemetery, here to lodge
 With unescutcheoned privacy interred
 Far from the family vault. A Chieftain one
 By right of birth; within whose spotless breast
 The fire of ancient Caledonia burned:
 He, with the foremost whose impatience hailed
 The Stuart, landing to resume, by force
 Of arms, the crown which bigotry had lost,
 Aroused his clan; and, fighting at their head,
 With his brave sword endeavoured to prevent
 Culloden's fatal overthrow. Escaped
 From that disastrous rout, to foreign shores
 He fled; and when the lenient hand of time
 Those troubles had appeased, he sought and gained,
 For his obscured condition, an obscure
 Retreat, within this nook of English ground.

 The other, born in Britain's southern tract,
 Had fixed his milder loyalty, and placed
 His gentler sentiments of love and hate,
 There, where 'they' placed them who in conscience prized
 The new succession, as a line of kings
 Whose oath had virtue to protect the land
 Against the dire assaults of papacy
 And arbitrary rule. But launch thy bark
 On the distempered flood of public life,
 And cause for most rare triumph will be thine
 If, spite of keenest eye and steadiest hand,
 The stream, that bears thee forward, prove not, soon
 Or late, a perilous master. He who oft,
 Beneath the battlements and stately trees
 That round his mansion cast a sober gloom,
 Had moralised on this, and other truths
 Of kindred import, pleased and satisfied
 Was forced to vent his wisdom with a sigh
 Heaved from the heart in fortune's bitterness,
 When he had crushed a plentiful estate
 By ruinous contest, to obtain a seat
 In Britain's senate. Fruitless was the attempt;
 And while the uproar of that desperate strife
 Continued yet to vibrate on his ear,
 The vanquished Whig, under a borrowed name,
 (For the mere sound and echo of his own
 Haunted him with sensations of disgust
 That he was glad to lose) slunk from the world
 To the deep shade of those untravelled Wilds;
 In which the Scottish Laird had long possessed
 An undisturbed abode. Here, then, they met,
 Two doughty champions; flaming Jacobite
 And sullen Hanoverian! You might think
 That losses and vexations, less severe
 Than those which they had severally sustained,
 Would have inclined each to abate his zeal
 For his ungrateful cause; no, I have heard
 My reverend Father tell that, 'mid the calm
 Of that small town encountering thus, they filled,
 Daily, its bowling-green with harmless strife;
 Plagued with uncharitable thoughts the church;
 And vexed the market-place. But in the breasts
 Of these opponents gradually was wrought,
 With little change of general sentiment,
 Such leaning towards each other, that their days
 By choice were spent in constant fellowship;
 And if, at times, they fretted with the yoke,
 Those very bickerings made them love it more.

 A favourite boundary to their lengthened walks
 This Churchyard was. And, whether they had come
 Treading their path in sympathy and linked
 In social converse, or by some short space
 Discreetly parted to preserve the peace,
 One spirit seldom failed to extend its sway
 Over both minds, when they awhile had marked
 The visible quiet of this holy ground,
 And breathed its soothing air: the spirit of hope
 And saintly magnanimity; that spurning
 The field of selfish difference and dispute,
 And every care which transitory things,
 Earth and the kingdoms of the earth, create
 Doth, by a rapture of forgetfulness,
 Preclude forgiveness, from the praise debarred,
 Which else the Christian virtue might have claimed.

 There live who yet remember here to have seen
 Their courtly figures, seated on the stump
 Of an old yew, their favourite resting-place.
 But as the remnant of the long-lived tree
 Was disappearing by a swift decay,
 They, with joint care, determined to erect,
 Upon its site, a dial, that might stand
 For public use preserved, and thus survive
 As their own private monument: for this
 Was the particular spot, in which they wished
 (And Heaven was pleased to accomplish the desire)
 That, undivided, their remains should lie.
 So, where the mouldered tree had stood, was raised
 Yon structure, framing, with the ascent of steps
 That to the decorated pillar lead,
 A work of art more sumptuous than might seem
 To suit this place; yet built in no proud scorn
 Of rustic homeliness; they only aimed
 To ensure for it respectful guardianship.
 Around the margin of the plate, whereon
 The shadow falls to note the stealthy hours,
 Winds an inscriptive legend." At these words
 Thither we turned; and gathered, as we read,
 The appropriate sense, in Latin numbers couched:
 'Time flies; it is his melancholy task,
 To bring, and bear away, delusive hopes,
 And re-produce the troubles he destroys.
 But, while his blindness thus is occupied,
 Discerning Mortal! do thou serve the will
 Of Time's eternal Master, and that peace,
 Which the world wants, shall be for thee confirmed!'

 "Smooth verse, inspired by no unlettered Muse,"
 Exclaimed the Sceptic, "and the strain of thought
 Accords with nature's language; the soft voice
 Of yon white torrent falling down the rocks
 Speaks, less distinctly, to the same effect.
 If, then, their blended influence be not lost
 Upon our hearts, not wholly lost, I grant,
 Even upon mine, the more are we required
 To feel for those among our fellow-men,
 Who, offering no obeisance to the world,
 Are yet made desperate by 'too quick a sense
 Of constant infelicity,' cut off
 From peace like exiles on some barren rock,
 Their life's appointed prison; not more free
 Than sentinels, between two armies, set,
 With nothing better, in the chill night air,
 Than their own thoughts to comfort them. Say why
 That ancient story of Prometheus chained
 To the bare rock on frozen Caucasus;
 The vulture, the inexhaustible repast
 Drawn from his vitals? Say what meant the woes
 By Tantalus entailed upon his race,
 And the dark sorrows of the line of Thebes?
 Fictions in form, but in their substance truths,
 Tremendous truths! familiar to the men
 Of long-past times, nor obsolete in ours.
 Exchange the shepherd's frock of native grey
 For robes with regal purple tinged; convert
 The crook into a sceptre; give the pomp
 Of circumstance; and here the tragic Muse
 Shall find apt subjects for her highest art.
 Amid the groves, under the shadowy hills,
 The generations are prepared; the pangs,
 The internal pangs, are ready; the dread strife
 Of poor humanity's afflicted will
 Struggling in vain with ruthless destiny."

 "Though," said the Priest in answer, "these be terms
 Which a divine philosophy rejects,
 We, whose established and unfailing trust
 Is in controlling Providence, admit
 That, through all stations, human life abounds
 With mysteries; for, if Faith were left untried,
 How could the might, that lurks within her, then
 Be shown? her glorious excellence that ranks
 Among the first of Powers and Virtues proved?
 Our system is not fashioned to preclude
 That sympathy which you for others ask;
 And I could tell, not travelling for my theme
 Beyond these humble graves, of grievous crimes
 And strange disasters; but I pass them by,
 Loth to disturb what Heaven hath hushed in peace.
 Still less, far less, am I inclined to treat
 Of Man degraded in his Maker's sight
 By the deformities of brutish vice:
 For, in such portraits, though a vulgar face
 And a coarse outside of repulsive life
 And unaffecting manners might at once
 Be recognised by all" "Ah! do not think,"
 The Wanderer somewhat eagerly exclaimed,
 "Wish could be ours that you, for such poor gain,
 (Gain shall I call it? gain of what? for whom?)
 Should breathe a word tending to violate
 Your own pure spirit. Not a step we look for
 In slight of that forbearance and reserve
 Which common human-heartedness inspires,
 And mortal ignorance and frailty claim,
 Upon this sacred ground, if nowhere else."

 "True," said the Solitary, "be it far
 From us to infringe the laws of charity.
 Let judgment here in mercy be pronounced;
 This, self-respecting Nature prompts, and this
 Wisdom enjoins; but if the thing we seek
 Be genuine knowledge, bear we then in mind
 How, from his lofty throne, the sun can fling
 Colours as bright on exhalations bred
 By weedy pool or pestilential swamp,
 As by the rivulet sparkling where it runs,
 Or the pellucid lake."
 "Small risk," said I,
 "Of such illusion do we here incur;
 Temptation here is none to exceed the truth;
 No evidence appears that they who rest
 Within this ground, were covetous of praise,
 Or of remembrance even, deserved or not.
 Green is the Churchyard, beautiful and green,
 Ridge rising gently by the side of ridge,
 A heaving surface, almost wholly free
 From interruption of sepulchral stones,
 And mantled o'er with aboriginal turf
 And everlasting flowers. These Dalesmen trust
 The lingering gleam of their departed lives
 To oral record, and the silent heart;
 Depositories faithful and more kind
 Than fondest epitaph: for, if those fail,
 What boots the sculptured tomb? And who can blame,
 Who rather would not envy, men that feel
 This mutual confidence; if, from such source,
 The practice flow, if thence, or from a deep
 And general humility in death?
 Nor should I much condemn it, if it spring
 From disregard of time's destructive power,
 As only capable to prey on things
 Of earth, and human nature's mortal part.

 Yet in less simple districts, where we see
 Stone lift its forehead emulous of stone
 In courting notice; and the ground all paved
 With commendations of departed worth;
 Reading, where'er we turn, of innocent lives,
 Of each domestic charity fulfilled,
 And sufferings meekly borne I, for my part,
 Though with the silence pleased that here prevails,
 Among those fair recitals also range,
 Soothed by the natural spirit which they breathe.
 And, in the centre of a world whose soil
 Is rank with all unkindness, compassed round
 With such memorials, I have sometimes felt,
 It was no momentary happiness
 To have 'one' Enclosure where the voice that speaks
 In envy or detraction is not heard;
 Which malice may not enter; where the traces
 Of evil inclinations are unknown;
 Where love and pity tenderly unite
 With resignation; and no jarring tone
 Intrudes, the peaceful concert to disturb
 Of amity and gratitude."
 "Thus sanctioned,"
 The Pastor said, "I willingly confine
 My narratives to subjects that excite
 Feelings with these accordant; love, esteem,
 And admiration; lifting up a veil,
 A sunbeam introducing among hearts
 Retired and covert; so that ye shall have
 Clear images before your gladdened eyes
 Of nature's unambitious underwood,
 And flowers that prosper in the shade. And when
 I speak of such among my flock as swerved
 Or fell, those only shall be singled out
 Upon whose lapse, or error, something more
 Than brotherly forgiveness may attend;
 To such will we restrict our notice, else
 Better my tongue were mute.
 And yet there are,
 I feel, good reasons why we should not leave
 Wholly untraced a more forbidding way.
 For, strength to persevere and to support,
 And energy to conquer and repel
 These elements of virtue, that declare
 The native grandeur of the human soul
 Are oft-times not unprofitably shown
 In the perverseness of a selfish course:
 Truth every day exemplified, no less
 In the grey cottage by the murmuring stream
 Than in fantastic conqueror's roving camp,
 Or 'mid the factious senate, unappalled
 Whoe'er may sink, or rise to sink again,
 As merciless proscription ebbs and flows.

 There," said the Vicar, pointing as he spake,
 "A woman rests in peace; surpassed by few
 In power of mind, and eloquent discourse.
 Tall was her stature; her complexion dark
 And saturnine; her head not raised to hold
 Converse with heaven, nor yet deprest towards earth,
 But in projection carried, as she walked
 For ever musing. Sunken were her eyes;
 Wrinkled and furrowed with habitual thought
 Was her broad forehead; like the brow of one
 Whose visual nerve shrinks from a painful glare
 Of overpowering light. While yet a child,
 She, 'mid the humble flowerets of the vale,
 Towered like the imperial thistle, not unfurnished
 With its appropriate grace, yet rather seeking
 To be admired, than coveted and loved.
 Even at that age she ruled, a sovereign queen,
 Over her comrades; else their simple sports,
 Wanting all relish for her strenuous mind,
 Had crossed her only to be shunned with scorn,
 Oh! pang of sorrowful regret for those
 Whom, in their youth, sweet study has enthralled,
 That they have lived for harsher servitude,
 Whether in soul, in body, or estate!
 Such doom was hers; yet nothing could subdue
 Her keen desire of knowledge, nor efface
 Those brighter images by books imprest
 Upon her memory, faithfully as stars
 That occupy their places, and, though oft
 Hidden by clouds, and oft bedimmed by haze,
 Are not to be extinguished, nor impaired.

 Two passions, both degenerate, for they both
 Began in honour, gradually obtained
 Rule over her, and vexed her daily life;
 An unremitting, avaricious thrift;
 And a strange thraldom of maternal love,
 That held her spirit, in its own despite,
 Bound by vexation, and regret, and scorn,
 Constrained forgiveness, and relenting vows,
 And tears, in pride suppressed, in shame concealed
 To a poor dissolute Son, her only child.
 Her wedded days had opened with mishap,
 Whence dire dependence. What could she perform
 To shake the burthen off? Ah! there was felt,
 Indignantly, the weakness of her sex.
 She mused, resolved, adhered to her resolve;
 The hand grew slack in alms-giving, the heart
 Closed by degrees to charity; heaven's blessing
 Not seeking from that source, she placed her trust
 In ceaseless pains and strictest parsimony
 Which sternly hoarded all that could be spared,
 From each day's need, out of each day's least gain.

 Thus all was re-established, and a pile
 Constructed, that sufficed for every end,
 Save the contentment of the builder's mind;
 A mind by nature indisposed to aught
 So placid, so inactive, as content;
 A mind intolerant of lasting peace,
 And cherishing the pang her heart deplored.
 Dread life of conflict! which I oft compared
 To the agitation of a brook that runs
 Down a rocky mountain, buried now and lost
 In silent pools, now in strong eddies chained;
 But never to be charmed to gentleness:
 Its best attainment fits of such repose
 As timid eyes might shrink from fathoming.

 A sudden illness seized her in the strength
 Of life's autumnal season. Shall I tell
 How on her bed of death the Matron lay,
 To Providence submissive, so she thought;
 But fretted, vexed, and wrought upon, almost
 To anger, by the malady that griped
 Her prostrate frame with unrelaxing power,
 As the fierce eagle fastens on the lamb?
 She prayed, she moaned; her husband's sister watched
 Her dreary pillow, waited on her needs;
 And yet the very sound of that kind foot
 Was anguish to her ears! 'And must she rule,'
 This was the death-doomed Woman heard to say
 In bitterness, 'and must she rule and reign,
 'Sole Mistress of this house, when I am gone?
 'Tend what I tended, calling it her own!'
 Enough; I fear, too much. One vernal evening,
 While she was yet in prime of health and strength,
 I well remember, while I passed her door
 Alone, with loitering step, and upward eye
 Turned towards the planet Jupiter that hung
 Above the centre of the Vale, a voice
 Roused me, her voice; it said, 'That glorious star
 'In its untroubled element will shine
 'As now it shines, when we are laid in earth
 'And safe from all our sorrows.' With a sigh
 She spake, yet, I believe, not unsustained
 By faith in glory that shall far transcend
 Aught by these perishable heavens disclosed
 To sight or mind. Nor less than care divine
 Is divine mercy. She, who had rebelled,
 Was into meekness softened and subdued;
 Did, after trials not in vain prolonged,
 With resignation sink into the grave;
 And her uncharitable acts, I trust,
 And harsh unkindnesses are all forgiven,
 Tho', in this Vale, remembered with deep awe."
 _____________

 THE Vicar paused; and toward a seat advanced,
 A long stone-seat, fixed in the Churchyard wall;
 Part shaded by cool sycamore, and part
 Offering a sunny resting-place to them
 Who seek the House of worship, while the bells
 Yet ring with all their voices, or before
 The last hath ceased its solitary knoll.
 Beneath the shade we all sate down; and there,
 His office, uninvited, he resumed.

 "As on a sunny bank, a tender lamb
 Lurks in safe shelter from the winds of March,
 Screened by its parent, so that little mound
 Lies guarded by its neighbour; the small heap
 Speaks for itself; an Infant there doth rest;
 The sheltering hillock is the Mother's grave.
 If mild discourse, and manners that conferred
 A natural dignity on humblest rank;
 If gladsome spirits, and benignant looks,
 That for a face not beautiful did more
 Than beauty for the fairest face can do;
 And if religious tenderness of heart,
 Grieving for sin, and penitential tears
 Shed when the clouds had gathered and distained
 The spotless ether of a maiden life;
 If these may make a hallowed spot of earth
 More holy in the sight of God or Man;
 Then, o'er that mould, a sanctity shall brood
 Till the stars sicken at the day of doom.

 Ah! what a warning for a thoughtless man,
 Could field or grove, could any spot of earth,
 Show to his eye an image of the pangs
 Which it hath witnessed; render back an echo
 Of the sad steps by which it hath been trod!
 There, by her innocent Baby's precious grave,
 And on the very turf that roofs her own,
 The Mother oft was seen to stand, or kneel
 In the broad day, a weeping Magdalene.
 Now she is not; the swelling turf reports
 Of the fresh shower, but of poor Ellen's tears
 Is silent; nor is any vestige left
 Of the path worn by mournful tread of her
 Who, at her heart's light bidding, once had moved
 In virgin fearlessness, with step that seemed
 Caught from the pressure of elastic turf
 Upon the mountains gemmed with morning dew,
 In the prime hour of sweetest scents and airs.
 Serious and thoughtful was her mind; and yet,
 By reconcilement exquisite and rare,
 The form, port, motions, of this Cottage-girl
 Were such as might have quickened and inspired
 A Titian's hand, addrest to picture forth
 Oread or Dryad glancing through the shade
 What time the hunter's earliest horn is heard
 Startling the golden hills.
 A wide-spread elm
 Stands in our valley, named THE JOYFUL TREE;
 From dateless usage which our peasants hold
 Of giving welcome to the first of May
 By dances round its trunk. And if the sky
 Permit, like honours, dance and song, are paid
 To the Twelfth Night, beneath the frosty stars
 Or the clear moon. The queen of these gay sports,
 If not in beauty yet in sprightly air,
 Was hapless Ellen. No one touched the ground
 So deftly, and the nicest maiden's locks
 Less gracefully were braided; but this praise,
 Methinks, would better suit another place.

 She loved, and fondly deemed herself beloved.
 The road is dim, the current unperceived,
 The weakness painful and most pitiful,
 By which a virtuous woman, in pure youth,
 May be delivered to distress and shame.
 Such fate was hers. The last time Ellen danced,
 Among her equals, round THE JOYFUL TREE,
 She bore a secret burthen; and full soon
 Was left to tremble for a breaking vow,
 Then, to bewail a sternly-broken vow,
 Alone, within her widowed Mother's house.
 It was the season of unfolding leaves,
 Of days advancing toward their utmost length,
 And small birds singing happily to mates
 Happy as they. With spirit-saddening power
 Winds pipe through fading woods; but those blithe notes
 Strike the deserted to the heart; I speak
 Of what I know, and what we feel within.
 Beside the cottage in which Ellen dwelt
 Stands a tall ash-tree; to whose topmost twig
 A thrush resorts, and annually chants,
 At morn and evening from that naked perch,
 While all the undergrove is thick with leaves,
 A time-beguiling ditty, for delight
 Of his fond partner, silent in the nest.
 'Ah why,' said Ellen, sighing to herself,
 'Why do not words, and kiss, and solemn pledge;
 'And nature that is kind in woman's breast,
 'And reason that in man is wise and good,
 'And fear of him who is a righteous judge;
 'Why do not these prevail for human life,
 'To keep two hearts together, that began
 'Their spring-time with one love, and that have need
 'Of mutual pity and forgiveness, sweet
 'To grant, or be received; while that poor bird
 'O come and hear him! Thou who hast to me
 'Been faithless, hear him, though a lowly creature,
 'One of God's simple children that yet know not
 'The universal Parent, how he sings
 'As if he wished the firmament of heaven
 'Should listen, and give back to him the voice
 'Of his triumphant constancy and love;
 'The proclamation that he makes, how far
 'His darkness doth transcend our fickle light!'

 Such was the tender passage, not by me
 Repeated without loss of simple phrase,
 Which I perused, even as the words had been
 Committed by forsaken Ellen's hand
 To the blank margin of a Valentine,
 Bedropped with tears. 'Twill please you to be told
 That, studiously withdrawing from the eye
 Of all companionship, the Sufferer yet
 In lonely reading found a meek resource:
 How thankful for the warmth of summer days,
 When she could slip into the cottage-barn,
 And find a secret oratory there;
 Or, in the garden, under friendly veil
 Of their long twilight, pore upon her book
 By the last lingering help of the open sky
 Until dark night dismissed her to her bed!
 Thus did a waking fancy sometimes lose
 The unconquerable pang of despised love.

 A kindlier passion opened on her soul
 When that poor Child was born. Upon its face
 She gazed as on a pure and spotless gift
 Of unexpected promise, where a grief
 Or dread was all that had been thought of, joy
 Far livelier than bewildered traveller feels,
 Amid a perilous waste that all night long
 Hath harassed him toiling through fearful storm,
 When he beholds the first pale speck serene
 Of day-spring, in the gloomy east, revealed,
 And greets it with thanksgiving. 'Till this hour,'
 Thus, in her Mother's hearing Ellen spake,
 'There was a stony region in my heart;
 'But He, at whose command the parched rock
 'Was smitten, and poured forth a quenching stream,
 'Hath softened that obduracy, and made
 'Unlooked-for gladness in the desert place,
 'To save the perishing; and, henceforth, I breathe
 'The air with cheerful spirit, for thy sake
 'My infant! and for that good Mother dear,
 'Who bore me; and hath prayed for me in vain;
 'Yet not in vain; it shall not be in vain.'
 She spake, nor was the assurance unfulfilled;
 And if heart-rending thoughts would oft return,
 They stayed not long. The blameless Infant grew
 The Child whom Ellen and her Mother loved
 They soon were proud of; tended it and nursed;
 A soothing comforter, although forlorn;
 Like a poor singing-bird from distant lands;
 Or a choice shrub, which he, who passes by
 With vacant mind, not seldom may observe
 Fair-flowering in a thinly-peopled house,
 Whose window, somewhat sadly, it adorns.

 Through four months' space the Infant drew its food
 From the maternal breast; then scruples rose;
 Thoughts, which the rich are free from, came and crossed
 The fond affection. She no more could bear
 By her offence to lay a twofold weight
 On a kind parent willing to forget
 Their slender means: so, to that parent's care
 Trusting her child, she left their common home,
 And undertook with dutiful content
 A Foster-mother's office.
 'Tis, perchance,
 Unknown to you that in these simple vales
 The natural feeling of equality
 Is by domestic service unimpaired;
 Yet, though such service be, with us, removed
 From sense of degradation, not the less
 The ungentle mind can easily find means
 To impose severe restraints and laws unjust,
 Which hapless Ellen now was doomed to feel:
 For (blinded by an over-anxious dread
 Of such excitement and divided thought
 As with her office would but ill accord)
 The pair, whose infant she was bound to nurse,
 Forbade her all communion with her own:
 Week after week, the mandate they enforced.
 So near! yet not allowed, upon that sight
 To fix her eyes alas! 'twas hard to bear!
 But worse affliction must be borne far worse;
 For 'tis Heaven's will that, after a disease
 Begun and ended within three days' space,
 Her child should die; as Ellen now exclaimed,
 Her own deserted child! Once, only once,
 She saw it in that mortal malady;
 And, on the burial-day, could scarcely gain
 Permission to attend its obsequies.
 She reached the house, last of the funeral train;
 And some one, as she entered, having chanced
 To urge unthinkingly their prompt departure,
 'Nay,' said she, with commanding look, a spirit
 Of anger never seen in her before,
 'Nay, ye must wait my time!' and down she sate,
 And by the unclosed coffin kept her seat
 Weeping and looking, looking on and weeping,
 Upon the last sweet slumber of her Child,
 Until at length her soul was satisfied.

 You see the Infant's Grave; and to this spot,
 The Mother, oft as she was sent abroad,
 On whatsoever errand, urged her steps:
 Hither she came; here stood, and sometimes knelt
 In the broad day, a rueful Magdalene!
 So call her; for not only she bewailed
 A mother's loss, but mourned in bitterness
 Her own transgression; penitent sincere
 As ever raised to heaven a streaming eye?
 At length the parents of the foster-child,
 Noting that in despite of their commands
 She still renewed and could not but renew
 Those visitations, ceased to send her forth;
 Or, to the garden's narrow bounds, confined.
 I failed not to remind them that they erred;
 For holy Nature might not thus be crossed,
 Thus wronged in woman's breast: in vain I pleaded
 But the green stalk of Ellen's life was snapped,
 And the flower drooped; as every eye could see,
 It hung its head in mortal languishment.
 Aided by this appearance, I at length
 Prevailed; and, from those bonds released, she went
 Home to her mother's house.
 The Youth was fled;
 The rash betrayer could not face the shame
 Or sorrow which his senseless guilt had caused;
 And little would his presence, or proof given
 Of a relenting soul, have now availed;
 For, like a shadow, he was passed away
 From Ellen's thoughts; had perished to her mind
 For all concerns of fear, or hope, or love,
 Save only those which to their common shame,
 And to his moral being appertained:
 Hope from that quarter would, I know, have brought
 A heavenly comfort; there she recognised
 An unrelaxing bond, a mutual need;
 There, and, as seemed, there only.
 She had built,
 Her fond maternal heart had built, a nest
 In blindness all too near the river's edge;
 That work a summer flood with hasty swell
 Had swept away; and now her Spirit longed
 For its last flight to heaven's security.
 The bodily frame wasted from day to day;
 Meanwhile, relinquishing all other cares,
 Her mind she strictly tutored to find peace
 And pleasure in endurance. Much she thought,
 And much she read; and brooded feelingly
 Upon her own unworthiness. To me,
 As to a spiritual comforter and friend,
 Her heart she opened; and no pains were spared
 To mitigate, as gently as I could,
 The sting of self-reproach, with healing words.
 Meek Saint! through patience glorified on earth!
 In whom, as by her lonely hearth she sate,
 The ghastly face of cold decay put on
 A sun-like beauty, and appeared divine!
 May I not mention that, within those walls,
 In due observance of her pious wish,
 The congregation joined with me in prayer
 For her soul's good? Nor was that office vain.
 Much did she suffer: but, if any friend,
 Beholding her condition, at the sight
 Gave way to words of pity or complaint,
 She stilled them with a prompt reproof, and said,
 'He who afflicts me knows what I can bear;
 'And, when I fail, and can endure no more,
 'Will mercifully take me to himself.'
 So, through the cloud of death, her Spirit passed
 Into that pure and unknown world of love
 Where injury cannot come: and here is laid
 The mortal Body by her Infant's side."

 The Vicar ceased; and downcast looks made known
 That each had listened with his inmost heart.
 For me, the emotion scarcely was less strong
 Or less benign than that which I had felt
 When seated near my venerable Friend,
 Under those shady elms, from him I heard
 The story that retraced the slow decline
 Of Margaret, sinking on the lonely heath
 With the neglected house to which she clung.
 I noted that the Solitary's cheek
 Confessed the power of nature. Pleased though sad,
 More pleased than sad, the grey-haired Wanderer sate;
 Thanks to his pure imaginative soul
 Capacious and serene; his blameless life,
 His knowledge, wisdom, love of truth, and love
 Of human kind! He was it who first broke
 The pensive silence, saying:
 "Blest are they
 Whose sorrow rather is to suffer wrong
 Than to do wrong, albeit themselves have erred.
 This tale gives proof that Heaven most gently deals
 With such, in their affliction. Ellen's fate,
 Her tender spirit, and her contrite heart,
 Call to my mind dark hints which I have heard
 Of one who died within this vale, by doom
 Heavier, as his offence was heavier far.
 Where, Sir, I pray you, where are laid the bones
 Of Wilfrid Armathwaite?"
 The Vicar answered,
 "In that green nook, close by the Churchyard wall,
 Beneath yon hawthorn, planted by myself
 In memory and for warning, and in sign
 Of sweetness where dire anguish had been known,
 Of reconcilement after deep offence
 There doth he rest. No theme his fate supplies
 For the smooth glozings of the indulgent world;
 Nor need the windings of his devious course
 Be here retraced; enough that, by mishap
 And venial error, robbed of competence,
 And her obsequious shadow, peace of mind,
 He craved a substitute in troubled joy;
 Against his conscience rose in arms, and, braving
 Divine displeasure, broke the marriage-vow.
 That which he had been weak enough to do
 Was misery in remembrance; he was stung,
 Stung by his inward thoughts, and by the smiles
 Of wife and children stung to agony.
 Wretched at home, he gained no peace abroad;
 Ranged through the mountains, slept upon the earth,
 Asked comfort of the open air, and found
 No quiet in the darkness of the night,
 No pleasure in the beauty of the day.
 His flock he slighted: his paternal fields
 Became a clog to him, whose spirit wished
 To fly but whither! And this gracious Church,
 That wears a look so full of peace and hope
 And love, benignant mother of the vale,
 How fair amid her brood of cottages!
 She was to him a sickness and reproach.
 Much to the last remained unknown: but this
 Is sure, that through remorse and grief he died;
 Though pitied among men, absolved by God,
 He could not find forgiveness in himself;
 Nor could endure the weight of his own shame.

 Here rests a Mother. But from her I turn
 And from her grave. Behold upon that ridge,
 That, stretching boldly from the mountain side,
 Carries into the centre of the vale
 Its rocks and woods the Cottage where she dwelt
 And where yet dwells her faithful Partner, left
 (Full eight years past) the solitary prop
 Of many helpless Children. I begin
 With words that might be prelude to a tale
 Of sorrow and dejection; but I feel
 No sadness, when I think of what mine eyes
 See daily in that happy family.
 Bright garland form they for the pensive brow
 Of their undrooping Father's widowhood,
 Those six fair Daughters, budding yet not one,
 Not one of all the band, a full-blown flower.
 Deprest, and desolate of soul, as once
 That Father was, and filled with anxious fear,
 Now, by experience taught, he stands assured,
 That God, who takes away, yet takes not half
 Of what he seems to take; or gives it back,
 Not to our prayer, but far beyond our prayer;
 He gives it the boon produce of a soil
 Which our endeavours have refused to till,
 And hope hath never watered. The Abode,
 Whose grateful owner can attest these truths,
 Even were the object nearer to our sight,
 Would seem in no distinction to surpass
 The rudest habitations. Ye might think
 That it had sprung self-raised from earth, or grown
 Out of the living rock, to be adorned
 By nature only; but, if thither led,
 Ye would discover, then, a studious work
 Of many fancies, prompting many hands.

 Brought from the woods the honeysuckle twines
 Around the porch, and seems, in that trim place,
 A plant no longer wild; the cultured rose
 There blossoms, strong in health, and will be soon
 Roof-high; the wild pink crowns the garden-wall,
 And with the flowers are intermingled stones
 Sparry and bright, rough scatterings of the hills.
 These ornaments, that fade not with the year,
 A hardy Girl continues to provide;
 Who, mounting fearlessly the rocky heights,
 Her Father's prompt attendant, does for him
 All that a boy could do, but with delight
 More keen and prouder daring; yet hath she,
 Within the garden, like the rest, a bed
 For her own flowers and favourite herbs, a space,
 By sacred charter, holden for her use.
 These, and whatever else the garden bears
 Of fruit or flower, permission asked or not,
 I freely gather; and my leisure draws
 A not unfrequent pastime from the hum
 Of bees around their range of sheltered hives
 Busy in that enclosure; while the rill,
 That sparkling thrids the rocks, attunes his voice
 To the pure course of human life which there
 Flows on in solitude. But, when the gloom
 Of night is falling round my steps, then most
 This Dwelling charms me; often I stop short,
 (Who could refrain?) and feed by stealth my sight
 With prospect of the company within,
 Laid open through the blazing window: there
 I see the eldest Daughter at her wheel
 Spinning amain, as if to overtake
 The never-halting time; or, in her turn,
 Teaching some Novice of the sisterhood
 That skill in this or other household work,
 Which, from her Father's honoured hand, herself,
 While she was yet a little-one, had learned.
 Mild Man! he is not gay, but they are gay;
 And the whole house seems filled with gaiety.
 Thrice happy, then, the Mother may be deemed,
 The Wife, from whose consolatory grave
 I turned, that ye in mind might witness where,
 And how, her Spirit yet survives on earth!"
