---
author: William Wordsworth 
title: Memorials Of A Tour In Italy, 1837 - XIV. - The Cuckoo At Laverna - May 25, 1837
---

 List 'twas the Cuckoo. O with what delight
 Heard I that voice! and catch it now, though faint,
 Far off and faint, and melting into air,
 Yet not to be mistaken. Hark again!
 Those louder cries give notice that the Bird,
 Although invisible as Echo's self,
 Is wheeling hitherward. Thanks, happy Creature,
 For this unthought-of greeting!
 
 While allured
 From vale to hill, from hill to vale led on,
 We have pursued, through various lands, a long
 And pleasant course; flower after flower has blown,
 Embellishing the ground that gave them birth
 With aspects novel to my sight; but still
 Most fair, most welcome, when they drank the dew
 In a sweet fellowship with kinds beloved,
 For old remembrance sake. And oft where Spring
 Displayed her richest blossoms among files
 Of orange-trees bedecked with glowing fruit
 Ripe for the hand, or under a thick shade
 Of Ilex, or, if better suited to the hour,
 The lightsome Olive's twinkling canopy 
 Oft have I heard the Nightingale and Thrush
 Blending as in a common English grove
 Their love-songs; but, where'er my feet might roam,
 Whate'er assemblages of new and old,
 Strange and familiar, might beguile the way,
 A gratulation from that vagrant Voice
 Was wanting, and most happily till now.
 
 For see, Laverna! mark the far-famed Pile,
 High on the brink of that precipitous rock,
 Implanted like a Fortress, as in truth
 It is, a Christian Fortress, garrisoned
 In faith and hope, and dutiful obedience,
 By a few Monks, a stern society,
 Dead to the world and scorning earth-born joys.
 Nay though the hopes that drew, the fears that drove,
 St. Francis, far from Man's resort, to abide
 Among these sterile heights of Apennine,
 Bound him, nor, since he raised yon House, have ceased
 To bind his spiritual Progeny, with rules
 Stringent as flesh can tolerate and live;
 His milder Genius (thanks to the good God
 That made us) over those severe restraints
 Of mind, that dread heart-freezing discipline,
 Doth sometimes here predominate, and works
 By unsought means for gracious purposes;
 For earth through heaven, for heaven, by changeful earth,
 Illustrated, and mutually endeared.
 
 Rapt though He were above the power of sense,
 Familiarly, yet out of the cleansed heart
 Of that once sinful Being overflowed
 On sun, moon, stars, the nether elements,
 And every shape of creature they sustain,
 Divine affections; and with beast and bird
 (Stilled from afar such marvel story tells 
 By casual outbreak of his passionate words,
 And from their own pursuits in field or grove
 Drawn to his side by look or act of love
 Humane, and virtue of his innocent life)
 He wont to hold companionship so free,
 So pure, so fraught with knowledge and delight,
 As to be likened in his Followers' minds
 To that which our first Parents, ere the fall
 From their high state darkened the Earth with fear,
 Held with all kinds in Eden's blissful bowers.
 
 Then question not that, 'mid the austere Band,
 Who breathe the air he breathed, tread where he trod,
 Some true Partakers of his loving spirit
 Do still survive, and, with those gentle hearts
 Consorted, Others, in the power, the faith,
 Of a baptized imagination, prompt
 To catch from Nature's humblest monitors
 Whate'er they bring of impulses sublime.
 
 Thus sensitive must be the Monk, though pale
 With fasts, with vigils worn, depressed by years,
 Whom in a sunny glade I chanced to see,
 Upon a pine-tree's storm-uprooted trunk,
 Seated alone, with forehead sky-ward raised,
 Hands clasped above the crucifix he wore
 Appended to his bosom, and lips closed
 By the joint pressure of his musing mood
 And habit of his vow. That ancient Man 
 Nor haply less the Brother whom I marked,
 As we approached the Convent gate aloft
 Looking far forth from his aerial cell,
 A young Ascetic Poet, Hero, Sage,
 He might have been, Lover belike he was 
 If they received into a conscious ear
 The notes whose first faint greeting startled me,
 Whose sedulous iteration thrilled with joy
 My heart may have been moved like me to think,
 Ah! not like me who walk in the world's ways,
 On the great Prophet, styled 'the Voice of One
 Crying amid the wilderness', and given,
 Now that their snows must melt, their herbs and flowers
 Revive, their obstinate winter pass away,
 That awful name to Thee, thee, simple Cuckoo,
 Wandering in solitude, and evermore
 Foretelling and proclaiming, ere thou leave
 This thy last haunt beneath Italian skies
 To carry thy glad tidings over heights
 Still loftier, and to climes more near the Pole.

 Voice of the Desert, fare-thee-well; sweet Bird!
 If that substantial title please thee more,
 Farewell! but go thy way, no need hast thou
 Of a good wish sent after thee; from bower
 To bower as green, from sky to sky as clear,
 Thee gentle breezes waft or airs, that meet
 Thy course and sport around thee, softly fan 
 Till Night, descending upon hill and vale,
 Grants to thy mission a brief term of silence,
 And folds thy pinions up in blest repose.
