---
author: William Wordsworth 
title: Lines Suggested By A Portrait From The Pencil Of F. Stone
---

 Beguiled into forgetfulness of care
 Due to the day's unfinished task; of pen
 Or book regardless, and of that fair scene
 In Nature's prodigality displayed
 Before my window, oftentimes and long
 I gaze upon a Portrait whose mild gleam
 Of beauty never ceases to enrich
 The common light; whose stillness charms the air,
 Or seems to charm it, into like repose;
 Whose silence, for the pleasure of the ear,
 Surpasses sweetest music. There she sits
 With emblematic purity attired
 In a white vest, white as her marble neck
 Is, and the pillar of the throat would be
 But for the shadow by the drooping chin
 Cast into that recess, the tender shade,
 The shade and light, both there and everywhere,
 And through the very atmosphere she breathes,
 Broad, clear, and toned harmoniously, with skill
 That might from nature have been learnt in the hour
 When the lone shepherd sees the morning spread
 Upon the mountains. Look at her, whoe'er
 Thou be that, kindling with a poet's soul,
 Hast loved the painter's true Promethean craft
 Intensely, from Imagination take
 The treasure, what mine eyes behold, see thou,
 Even though the Atlantic ocean roll between.
 
 A silver line, that runs from brow to crown
 And in the middle parts the braided hair,
 Just serves to show how delicate a soil
 The golden harvest grows in; and those eyes,
 Soft and capacious as a cloudless sky
 Whose azure depth their colour emulates,
 Must needs be conversant with upward looks,
 Prayer's voiceless service; but now, seeking nought
 And shunning nought, their own peculiar life
 Of motion they renounce, and with the head
 Partake its inclination towards earth
 In humble grace, and quiet pensiveness
 Caught at the point where it stops short of sadness.
 
 Offspring of soul-bewitching Art, make me
 Thy confidant! say, whence derived that air
 Of calm abstraction? Can the ruling thought
 Be with some lover far away, or one
 Crossed by misfortune, or of doubted faith?
 Inapt conjecture! Childhood here, a moon
 Crescent in simple loveliness serene,
 Has but approached the gates of womanhood,
 Not entered them; her heart is yet unpierced
 By the blind Archer-god; her fancy free:
 The fount of feeling if unsought elsewhere,
 Will not be found.
 
 Her right hand, as it lies
 Across the slender wrist of the left arm
 Upon her lap reposing, holds but mark
 How slackly, for the absent mind permits
 No firmer grasp a little wild-flower, joined
 As in a posy, with a few pale ears
 Of yellowing corn, the same that overtopped
 And in their common birthplace sheltered it
 'Till they were plucked together; a blue flower
 Called by the thrifty husbandman a weed;
 But Ceres, in her garland, might have worn
 That ornament, unblamed. The floweret, held
 In scarcely conscious fingers, was, she knows,
 (Her Father told her so) in youth's gay dawn
 Her Mother's favourite; and the orphan Girl,
 In her own dawn, a dawn less gay and bright,
 Loves it, while there in solitary peace
 She sits, for that departed Mother's sake.
 Not from a source less sacred is derived
 (Surely I do not err) that pensive air
 Of calm abstraction through the face diffused
 And the whole person.

 Words have something told
 More than the pencil can, and verily
 More than is needed, but the precious Art
 Forgives their interference, Art divine,
 That both creates and fixes, in despite
 Of Death and Time, the marvels it hath wrought.
 
 Strange contrasts have we in this world of ours!
 That posture, and the look of filial love
 Thinking of past and gone, with what is left
 Dearly united, might be swept away
 From this fair Portrait's fleshly Archetype,
 Even by an innocent fancy's slightest freak
 Banished, nor ever, haply, be restored
 To their lost place, or meet in harmony
 So exquisite; but 'here' do they abide,
 Enshrined for ages. Is not then the Art
 Godlike, a humble branch of the divine,
 In visible quest of immortality,
 Stretched forth with trembling hope? In every realm,
 From high Gibraltar to Siberian plains,
 Thousands, in each variety of tongue
 That Europe knows, would echo this appeal;
 One above all, a Monk who waits on God
 In the magnific Convent built of yore
 To sanctify the Escurial palace. He
 Guiding, from cell to cell and room to room,
 A British Painter (eminent for truth
 In character, and depth of feeling, shown
 By labours that have touched the hearts of kings,
 And are endeared to simple cottagers)
 Came, in that service, to a glorious work,
 Our Lord's Last Supper, beautiful as when first
 The appropriate Picture, fresh from Titian's hand,
 Graced the Refectory: and there, while both
 Stood with eyes fixed upon that masterpiece,
 The hoary Father in the Stranger's ear
 Breathed out these words: "Here daily do we sit,
 Thanks given to God for daily bread, and here
 Pondering the mischiefs of these restless times,
 And thinking of my Brethren, dead, dispersed,
 Or changed and changing, I not seldom gaze
 Upon this solemn Company unmoved
 By shock of circumstance, or lapse of years,
 Until I cannot but believe that they
 They are in truth the Substance, we the Shadows."
 
 So spake the mild Jeronymite, his griefs
 Melting away within him like a dream
 Ere he had ceased to gaze, perhaps to speak:
 And I, grown old, but in a happier land,
 Domestic Portrait! have to verse consigned
 In thy calm presence those heart-moving words:
 Words that can soothe, more than they agitate;
 Whose spirit, like the angel that went down
 Into Bethesda's pool, with healing virtue
 Informs the fountain in the human breast
 Which by the visitation was disturbed.
 But why this stealing tear? Companion mute,
 On thee I look, not sorrowing; fare thee well,
 My Song's Inspirer, once again farewell!
