---
author: William Lisle Bowles 
title: Banwell Hill; A Lay Of The Severn Sea. Part Fourth
---

PART FOURTH.

WALK ABROAD - VIEWS AROUND, FROM THE SEVERN TO BRISTOL - WRINGTON - "AULD ROBIN GRAY."

 The shower is past - the heath-bell, at our feet,
 Looks up, as with a smile, though the cold dew
 Hangs yet within its cup, like Pity's tear
 Upon the eyelids of a village child!
 Mark! where a light upon those far-off waves
 Gleams, while the passing shower above our head
 Sheds its last silent drops, amid the hues
 Of the fast-fading rainbow, - such is life!
 Let us go forth, the redbreast is abroad,
 And, dripping in the sunshine, sings again.10
No object on the wider sea-line meets
 The straining vision, but one distant ship,
 Hanging, as motionless and still, far off,
 In the pale haze, between the sea and sky.
 She seems the ship - the very ship I saw
 In infancy, and in that very place,
 Whilst I, and all around me, have grown old
 Since she was first descried; and there she sits,
 A solitary thing of the wide main - 
 As she sat years ago. Yet she moves on: - 20
 To-morrow all may be one waste of waves!
 Where is she bound? We know not; and no voice 22
 Will tell us where. Perhaps she beats her way
 Slow up the channel, after many years,
 Returning from some distant clime, or lands,
 Beyond the Atlantic! Oh! what anxious eyes
 Count every nearer surge that heaves around!
 How many anxious hearts this moment beat
 With thronging thoughts of home, till those fixed eyes,
 Intensely fixed upon these very hills,30
 Are filled with tears! Perhaps she wanders on - 
 On - on - into the world of the vast sea,
 There to be lost: never, with homeward sails,
 Destined to greet these far-seen hills again,
 Now fading into mist! So let her speed,
 And we will pray she may return in joy,
 When every storm is past! Such is this sea,
 That shows one wandering ship! How different smile
 The sea-scenes of the south; and chiefly thine,
 Waters of loveliest Hampton, chiefly thine - 40
 Where I have passed the happiest hours of youth - 
 Waters of loveliest Hampton! Thy gray walls,
 And loop-hooled battlements, cast the same shade
 Upon the light blue wave, as when of yore,
 Beneath their arch, King Canute sat,[74] and chid
 The tide, that came regardless to his feet,
 A thousand years ago. Oh! how unlike
 Yon solitary sea, the summer shines,
 There, while a crowd of glancing vessels glide,
 Filled with the young and gay, and pennants wave,50
 And sails, at distance, beautifully swell
 To the light breeze, or pass, like butterflies,
 Amid the smoking steamers. And, oh look! - 
 Look! what a fairy lady is that yacht
 That turns the wooded point, and silently55
 Streams up the sylvan Itchin; silently - 
 And yet as if she said, as she went on,
 Who does not gaze at me!
Yon winding sands
 Were solitary once, as the wide sea.60
 Such I remember them! No sound was heard,
 Save of the sea-gull warping on the wind,
 Or of the surge that broke along the shore,
 Sad as the seas; and can I e'er forget,
 When, once, a visitor from Oxenford,
 Proud of Wintonian scholarship, a youth,
 Silent, but yet light-hearted, deeming here
 I could have no companion fit for him - 
 So whispered youthful vanity - for him
 Whom Oxford[75] had distinguished, - can my heart 70
 Forget when once, with thoughts like these, at morn,
 I wandered forth alone! The first ray shone
 On the white sea-gull's wing, and gazing round,
 I listened to the tide's advancing roar,
 When, for the old and booted fisherman,
 Who silent dredged for shrimps, in the cold haze
 Of sunrise, I beheld - or was it not
 A momentary vision? - a fair form - 
 A female, following, with light, airy step,
 The wave as it retreated, and again80
 Tripping before it, till it touched her foot,
 As if in play; and she stood beautiful,
 Like to a fairy sea-maid of the deep,
 Graceful, and young, and on the sands alone.
 I looked that she would vanish! She had left,
 Like me, just left the abode of discipline,
 And came, in the gay fulness of her heart,
 When the pale light first glanced along the wave,88
 To play with the wild ocean, like a child;
 And though I knew her not, I vowed (oh, hear,
 Ye votaries of German sentiment!) - 
 Vowed an eternal love; but, diffident,
 I cast a parting look, that seemed to say,
 Shall we ne'er meet again? The vision smiled,
 And left the scene to solitude. Once more
 We met, and then we parted, in this world
 To meet no more; and that fair form, that shone
 The vision of a moment, on the sands,
 Was never seen again! Now it has passed
 Where all things are forgotten; but it shone 100
 To me a sparkle of the morning sun,
 That trembled on the light wave yesterday,
 And perished there for ever!
Look around!
 Above the winding reach of Severn stands,
 With massy fragments of forsaken towers,
 Thy castle, solitary Walton. Hark!
 Through the lone ivied arch, was it the wind
 Came fitful! There, by moonlight, we might stand,
 And deem it some old castle of romance; 110
 And on the glimmering ledge of yonder rock,
 Above the wave, fancy it was the form
 Of a spectre-lady, for a moment seen,
 Lifting her bloody dagger, then with shrieks
 Vanishing! Hush! there is no sound - no sound
 But of the Severn sweeping onward! Look!
 There is no bleeding apparition there - 
 No fiery phantoms glare along thy walls!
 Surrounded by the works of silent art,
 And far, far more endearing, by a group 120
 Of breathing children, their possessor lives;[76] 121
 And ill should I deserve the name of bard - 
 Of courtly bard, if I could touch this theme
 Without a prayer - an earnest, heartfelt prayer,
 When one, whose smile I never saw but once,
 Yet cannot well forget, when one now blooms - 
 Unlike the spectre-lady of the rock - 
 A living and a lovely bride![77]
 How proud,
 Opposed to Walton's silent towers, how proud,130
 With all her spires and fanes, and volumed smoke,
 Trailing in columns to the midday sun,
 Black, or pale blue, above the cloudy haze,
 And the great stir of commerce, and the noise
 Of passing and repassing wains, and cars,
 And sledges, grating in their underpath,
 And trade's deep murmur, and a street of masts
 And pennants from all nations of the earth,
 Streaming below the houses, piled aloft,
 Hill above hill; and every road below140
 Gloomy with troops of coal-nymphs, seated high
 On their rough pads, in dingy dust serene: - 
 How proudly, amid sights and sounds like these,
 Bristol, through all whose smoke, dark and aloof,
 Stands Redcliff's solemn fane, - how proudly girt
 With villages, and Clifton's airy rocks,
 Bristol, the mistress of the Severn sea - 
 Bristol, amid her merchant-palaces,
 That ancient city sits!
 From out those trees,150
 Look! Congresbury lifts its slender spire!
 How many woody glens and nooks of shade,152
 With transient sunshine, fill the interval,
 As rich as Poussin's landscapes! Gnarled oaks,
 Dark, or with fits of desultory light
 Flung through the branches, there o'erhang the road,
 Where sheltered, as romantic, Brockley-Coombe
 Allures the lingering traveller to wind,
 Step by step, up its sylvan hollow, slow,
 Till, the proud summit gained, how gloriously160
 The wide scene lies in light! how gloriously
 Sun, shadows, and blue mountains far away,
 Woods, meadows, and the mighty Severn blend,
 While the gray heron up shoots, and screams for joy!
 There the dark yew starts from the limestone rock
 Into faint sunshine; there the ivy hangs
 From the old oak, whose upper branches, bare,
 Seem as admonishing the nether woods
 Of Time's swift pace; while dark and deep beneath
 The fearful hollow yawns, upon whose edge 170
 One peeping cot sends up, from out the fern,
 Its early wreath of slow-ascending smoke.
 And who lives in that far-secluded cot?
 Poor Dinah! She was once a serving-maid,
 Most beautiful; now, on the wild wood's edge
 She lives alone, alone, and bowed with age,
 Muttering, and sad, and scarce within the sound
 Of human kind, forsaken as the scene!
 Nor pass we Fayland, with its fairy rings
 Marking the turf, where tiny elves may dance,180
 Their light feet twinkling in the dewy gleam,
 By moonlight. But what sullen demon piled
 The rocks, that stern in desolation frown,
 Through the deep solitude of Goblin-Coombe,[78]
 Where, wheeling o'er its crags, the shrilling kite183
 More dismal makes its utter dreariness!
But yonder, at the foot of Mendip, smiles
 The seat of cultivated Addington:[79]
 And there, that beautiful but solemn church
 Presides o'er the still scene, where one old friend[80] 190
 Lives social, while the shortening day unfelt
 Steals on, and eve, with smiling light, descends - 
 With smiling light, that, lingering on the tower,
 Reminds earth's pilgrim of his lasting home.
Is that a magic garden on the edge
 Of Mendip hung? Even so it seems to gleam;
 While many a cottage, on to Wrington's smoke
 (Wrington, the birth-place of immortal Locke),
 Chequers the village-crofts and lowly glens
 With porch of flowers, and bird-cage, at the door,200
 That seems to say - England, with all thy crimes,
 And smitten as thou art by pauper-laws,
 England, thou only art the poor man's home!
And yonder Blagdon, in its sheltered glen,
 Sits pensive, like a rock-bird in its cleft.
 The craggy glen here winds, with ivy hung,
 Beneath whose dark, depending tresses peeps
 The Cheddar-pink; there fragments of red rock
 Start from the verdant turf, among the flowers.
 And who can paint sweet Blagdon, and not think 210
 Of Langhorne, in that hermitage of song - 
 Langhorne, a pastor, and a poet too![81]
 He, in retirement's literary bower,
 Oft wooed the Sisters of the sacred well,
 Harmonious: nor pass on without a prayer
 For her, associate of his early fame,216
 Accomplished, eloquent, and pious More,[82]
 Who now, with slow and gentle decadence,
 In the same vale, with look upraised to heaven,
 Waits meekly at the gate of paradise,220
 Smiling at time!
But, hark! there comes a song,
 Of Scotland's lakes and hills - Auld Robin Gray!
 Tweed, or the winding Tay, ne'er echoed words
 More sadly soothing; but the melody,[83]
 Like some sweet melody of olden times,
 A ditty of past days, rose from those woods.
 Oh! could I hear it, as I heard it once - 
 Sung by a maiden[84] of the south, whose look
 (Although her song be sweet), whose look, and life,230
 Are sweeter than her song - no minstrel gray,
 Like Donald and "the Lady of the Lake,"
 But would lay down his harp, and when the song
 Was ended, raise his lighted eyes, and smile,
 To thank that maiden, with a strain like this: - 

 Oh! when I hear thee sing of "Jamie far away,"
 Of "father and of mother," and of "Auld Robin Gray,"
 I listen till I think it is Jeanie's self I hear,
 And I look in thy face with a blessing and a tear.

 "I look in thy face," for my heart it is not cold,[85] 240
 Though winter's frost is stealing on, and I am growing old;
 Those tones I shall remember as long as I live, 242
 And a blessing and a tear shall be the thanks I give.

 The tear it is for summers that so blithesome have been,
 For the flowers that all are faded, and the days that I have seen;
 The blessing, lassie, is for thee, whose song, so sadly sweet,
 Recalls the music of "Lang Syne," to which my heart has beat.
