---
author: William Wordsworth 
title: The Excursion - Book Ninth - Discourse Of The Wanderer, And An Evening Visit To The Lake
---

 "To every Form of being is assigned,"
 Thus calmly spake the venerable Sage,
 "An 'active' Principle: howe'er removed
 From sense and observation, it subsists
 In all things, in all natures; in the stars
 Of azure heaven, the unenduring clouds,
 In flower and tree, in every pebbly stone
 That paves the brooks, the stationary rocks,
 The moving waters, and the invisible air.
 Whate'er exists hath properties that spread
 Beyond itself, communicating good
 A simple blessing, or with evil mixed;
 Spirit that knows no insulated spot,
 No chasm, no solitude; from link to link
 It circulates, the Soul of all the worlds.
 This is the freedom of the universe;
 Unfolded still the more, more visible,
 The more we know; and yet is reverenced least,
 And least respected in the human Mind,
 Its most apparent home. The food of hope
 Is meditated action; robbed of this
 Her sole support, she languishes and dies.
 We perish also; for we live by hope
 And by desire; we see by the glad light
 And breathe the sweet air of futurity;
 And so we live, or else we have no life.
 To-morrow nay perchance this very hour
 (For every moment hath its own to-morrow!)
 Those blooming Boys, whose hearts are almost sick
 With present triumph, will be sure to find
 A field before them freshened with the dew
 Of other expectations; in which course
 Their happy year spins round. The youth obeys
 A like glad impulse; and so moves the man
 'Mid all his apprehensions, cares, and fears,
 Or so he ought to move. Ah! why in age
 Do we revert so fondly to the walks
 Of childhood but that there the Soul discerns
 The dear memorial footsteps unimpaired
 Of her own native vigour; thence can hear
 Reverberations; and a choral song,
 Commingling with the incense that ascends,
 Undaunted, toward the imperishable heavens,
 From her own lonely altar?
 Do not think
 That good and wise ever will be allowed,
 Though strength decay, to breathe in such estate
 As shall divide them wholly from the stir
 Of hopeful nature. Rightly is it said
 That Man descends into the VALE of years;
 Yet have I thought that we might also speak,
 And not presumptuously, I trust, of Age,
 As of a final EMINENCE; though bare
 In aspect and forbidding, yet a point
 On which 'tis not impossible to sit
 In awful sovereignty; a place of power,
 A throne, that may be likened unto his,
 Who, in some placid day of summer, looks
 Down from a mountain-top, say one of those
 High peaks, that bound the vale where now we are.
 Faint, and diminished to the gazing eye,
 Forest and field, and hill and dale appear,
 With all the shapes over their surface spread:
 But, while the gross and visible frame of things
 Relinquishes its hold upon the sense,
 Yea almost on the Mind herself, and seems
 All unsubstantialized, how loud the voice
 Of waters, with invigorated peal
 From the full river in the vale below,
 Ascending! For on that superior height
 Who sits, is disencumbered from the press
 Of near obstructions, and is privileged
 To breathe in solitude, above the host
 Of ever-humming insects, 'mid thin air
 That suits not them. The murmur of the leaves
 Many and idle, visits not his ear:
 This he is freed from, and from thousand notes
 (Not less unceasing, not less vain than these,)
 By which the finer passages of sense
 Are occupied; and the Soul, that would incline
 To listen, is prevented or deterred.

 And may it not be hoped, that, placed by age
 In like removal, tranquil though severe,
 We are not so removed for utter loss;
 But for some favour, suited to our need?
 What more than that the severing should confer
 Fresh power to commune with the invisible world,
 And hear the mighty stream of tendency
 Uttering, for elevation of our thought,
 A clear sonorous voice, inaudible
 To the vast multitude; whose doom it is
 To run the giddy round of vain delight,
 Or fret and labour on the Plain below.

 But, if to such sublime ascent the hopes
 Of Man may rise, as to a welcome close
 And termination of his mortal course;
 Them only can such hope inspire whose minds
 Have not been starved by absolute neglect;
 Nor bodies crushed by unremitting toil;
 To whom kind Nature, therefore, may afford
 Proof of the sacred love she bears for all;
 Whose birthright Reason, therefore, may ensure.
 For me, consulting what I feel within
 In times when most existence with herself
 Is satisfied, I cannot but believe,
 That, far as kindly Nature hath free scope
 And Reason's sway predominates; even so far,
 Country, society, and time itself,
 That saps the individual's bodily frame,
 And lays the generations low in dust,
 Do, by the almighty Ruler's grace, partake
 Of one maternal spirit, bringing forth
 And cherishing with ever-constant love,
 That tires not, nor betrays. Our life is turned
 Out of her course, wherever man is made
 An offering, or a sacrifice, a tool
 Or implement, a passive thing employed
 As a brute mean, without acknowledgment
 Of common right or interest in the end;
 Used or abused, as selfishness may prompt.
 Say, what can follow for a rational soul
 Perverted thus, but weakness in all good,
 And strength in evil? Hence an after-call
 For chastisement, and custody, and bonds,
 And oft-times Death, avenger of the past,
 And the sole guardian in whose hands we dare
 Entrust the future. Not for these sad issues
 Was Man created; but to obey the law
 Of life, and hope, and action. And 'tis known
 That when we stand upon our native soil,
 Unelbowed by such objects as oppress
 Our active powers, those powers themselves become
 Strong to subvert our noxious qualities:
 They sweep distemper from the busy day,
 And make the chalice of the big round year
 Run o'er with gladness; whence the Being moves
 In beauty through the world; and all who see
 Bless him, rejoicing in his neighbourhood."

 "Then," said the Solitary, "by what force
 Of language shall a feeling heart express
 Her sorrow for that multitude in whom
 We look for health from seeds that have been sown
 In sickness, and for increase in a power
 That works but by extinction? On themselves
 They cannot lean, nor turn to their own hearts
 To know what they must do; their wisdom is
 To look into the eyes of others, thence
 To be instructed what they must avoid:
 Or rather, let us say, how least observed,
 How with most quiet and most silent death,
 With the least taint and injury to the air
 The oppressor breathes, their human form divine,
 And their immortal soul, may waste away."

 The Sage rejoined, "I thank you you have spared
 My voice the utterance of a keen regret,
 A wide compassion which with you I share.
 When, heretofore, I placed before your sight
 A Little-one, subjected to the arts
 Of modern ingenuity, and made
 The senseless member of a vast machine,
 Serving as doth a spindle or a wheel;
 Think not, that, pitying him, I could forget
 The rustic Boy, who walks the fields, untaught;
 The slave of ignorance, and oft of want,
 And miserable hunger. Much, too much,
 Of this unhappy lot, in early youth
 We both have witnessed, lot which I myself
 Shared, though in mild and merciful degree:
 Yet was the mind to hindrances exposed,
 Through which I struggled, not without distress
 And sometimes injury, like a lamb enthralled
 'Mid thorns and brambles; or a bird that breaks
 Through a strong net, and mounts upon the wind,
 Though with her plumes impaired. If they, whose souls
 Should open while they range the richer fields
 Of merry England, are obstructed less
 By indigence, their ignorance is not less,
 Nor less to be deplored. For who can doubt
 That tens of thousands at this day exist
 Such as the boy you painted, lineal heirs
 Of those who once were vassals of her soil,
 Following its fortunes like the beasts or trees
 Which it sustained. But no one takes delight
 In this oppression; none are proud of it;
 It bears no sounding name, nor ever bore;
 A standing grievance, an indigenous vice
 Of every country under heaven. My thoughts
 Were turned to evils that are new and chosen,
 A bondage lurking under shape of good,
 Arts, in themselves beneficent and kind,
 But all too fondly followed and too far;
 To victims, which the merciful can see
 Nor think that they are victims turned to wrongs,
 By women, who have children of their own,
 Beheld without compassion, yea with praise!
 I spake of mischief by the wise diffused
 With gladness, thinking that the more it spreads
 The healthier, the securer, we become;
 Delusion which a moment may destroy!
 Lastly, I mourned for those whom I had seen
 Corrupted and cast down, on favoured ground,
 Where circumstance and nature had combined
 To shelter innocence, and cherish love;
 Who, but for this intrusion, would have lived,
 Possessed of health, and strength, and peace of mind;
 Thus would have lived, or never have been born.

 Alas! what differs more than man from man!
 And whence that difference? whence but from himself?
 For see the universal Race endowed
 With the same upright form! The sun is fixed,
 And the infinite magnificence of heaven
 Fixed, within reach of every human eye;
 The sleepless ocean murmurs for all ears;
 The vernal field infuses fresh delight
 Into all hearts. Throughout the world of sense,
 Even as an object is sublime or fair,
 That object is laid open to the view
 Without reserve or veil; and as a power
 Is salutary, or an influence sweet,
 Are each and all enabled to perceive
 That power, that influence, by impartial law.
 Gifts nobler are vouchsafed alike to all;
 Reason, and, with that reason, smiles and tears;
 Imagination, freedom in the will;
 Conscience to guide and check; and death to be
 Foretasted, immortality conceived
 By all, a blissful immortality,
 To them whose holiness on earth shall make
 The Spirit capable of heaven, assured.
 Strange, then, nor less than monstrous, might be deemed
 The failure, if the Almighty, to this point
 Liberal and undistinguishing, should hide
 The excellence of moral qualities
 From common understanding; leaving truth
 And virtue, difficult, abstruse, and dark;
 Hard to be won, and only by a few;
 Strange, should He deal herein with nice respects,
 And frustrate all the rest! Believe it not:
 The primal duties shine aloft like stars;
 The charities that soothe, and heal, and bless,
 Are scattered at the feet of Man like flowers.
 The generous inclination, the just rule,
 Kind wishes, and good actions, and pure thoughts
 No mystery is here! Here is no boon
 For high yet not for low; for proudly graced
 Yet not for meek of heart. The smoke ascends
 To heaven as lightly from the cottage hearth
 As from the haughtiest palace. He, whose soul
 Ponders this true equality, may walk
 The fields of earth with gratitude and hope;
 Yet, in that meditation, will he find
 Motive to sadder grief, as we have found;
 Lamenting ancient virtues overthrown,
 And for the injustice grieving, that hath made
 So wide a difference between man and man.

 Then let us rather fix our gladdened thoughts
 Upon the brighter scene. How blest that pair
 Of blooming Boys (whom we beheld even now)
 Blest in their several and their common lot!
 A few short hours of each returning day
 The thriving prisoners of their village school:
 And thence let loose, to seek their pleasant homes
 Or range the grassy lawn in vacancy:
 To breathe and to he happy, run and shout
 Idle, but no delay, no harm, no loss;
 For every genial power of heaven and earth,
 Through all the seasons of the changeful year,
 Obsequiously doth take upon herself
 To labour for them; bringing each in turn
 The tribute of enjoyment, knowledge, health,
 Beauty, or strength! Such privilege is theirs,
 Granted alike in the outset of their course
 To both; and, if that partnership must cease,
 I grieve not," to the Pastor here he turned,
 "Much as I glory in that child of yours,
 Repine not for his cottage-comrade, whom
 Belike no higher destiny awaits
 Than the old hereditary wish fulfilled;
 The wish for liberty to live content
 With what Heaven grants, and die in peace of mind,
 Within the bosom of his native vale.
 At least, whatever fate the noon of life
 Reserves for either, sure it is that both
 Have been permitted to enjoy the dawn;
 Whether regarded as a jocund time,
 That in itself may terminate, or lead
 In course of nature to a sober eve.
 Both have been fairly dealt with; looking back
 They will allow that justice has in them
 Been shown, alike to body and to mind."

 He paused, as if revolving in his soul
 Some weighty matter; then, with fervent voice
 And an impassioned majesty, exclaimed

 "O for the coming of that glorious time
 When, prizing knowledge as her noblest wealth
 And best protection, this imperial Realm,
 While she exacts allegiance, shall admit
 An obligation, on her part, to 'teach'
 Them who are born to serve her and obey;
 Binding herself by statute to secure
 For all the children whom her soil maintains
 The rudiments of letters, and inform
 The mind with moral and religious truth,
 Both understood and practised, so that none,
 However destitute, be left to droop
 By timely culture unsustained; or run
 Into a wild disorder; or be forced
 To drudge through a weary life without the help
 Of intellectual implements and tools;
 A savage horde among the civilised,
 A servile band among the lordly free!
 This sacred right, the lisping babe proclaims
 To be inherent in him, by Heaven's will,
 For the protection of his innocence;
 And the rude boy who, having overpast
 The sinless age, by conscience is enrolled,
 Yet mutinously knits his angry brow,
 And lifts his wilful hand on mischief bent,
 Or turns the godlike faculty of speech
 To impious use by process indirect
 Declares his due, while he makes known his need.
 This sacred right is fruitlessly announced,
 This universal plea in vain addressed,
 To eyes and ears of parents who themselves
 Did, in the time of their necessity,
 Urge it in vain; and, therefore, like a prayer
 That from the humblest floor ascends to heaven,
 It mounts to meet the State's parental ear;
 Who, if indeed she own a mother's heart,
 And be not most unfeelingly devoid
 Of gratitude to Providence, will grant
 The unquestionable good which, England, safe
 From interference of external force,
 May grant at leisure; without risk incurred
 That what in wisdom for herself she doth,
 Others shall e'er be able to undo.

 Look! and behold, from Calpe's sun-burnt cliffs
 To the flat margin of the Baltic sea,
 Long-reverenced titles cast away as weeds;
 Laws overturned; and territory split,
 Like fields of ice rent by the polar wind,
 And forced to join in less obnoxious shapes
 Which, ere they gain consistence, by a gust
 Of the same breath are shattered and destroyed.
 Meantime the sovereignty of these fair Isles
 Remains entire and indivisible:
 And, if that ignorance were removed, which breeds
 Within the compass of their several shores
 Dark discontent, or loud commotion, each
 Might still preserve the beautiful repose
 Of heavenly bodies shining in their spheres.
 The discipline of slavery is unknown
 Among us, hence the more do we require
 The discipline of virtue; order else
 Cannot subsist, nor confidence, nor peace.
 Thus, duties rising out of good possest,
 And prudent caution needful to avert
 Impending evil, equally require
 That the whole people should be taught and trained.
 So shall licentiousness and black resolve
 Be rooted out, and virtuous habits take
 Their place; and genuine piety descend,
 Like an inheritance, from age to age.

 With such foundations laid, avaunt the fear
 Of numbers crowded on their native soil,
 To the prevention of all healthful growth
 Through mutual injury! Rather in the law
 Of increase and the mandate from above
 Rejoice! and ye have special cause for joy.
 For, as the element of air affords
 An easy passage to the industrious bees
 Fraught with their burthens; and a way as smooth
 For those ordained to take their sounding flight
 From the thronged hive, and settle where they list
 In fresh abodes their labour to renew;
 So the wide waters, open to the power,
 The will, the instincts, and appointed needs
 Of Britain, do invite her to cast off
 Her swarms, and in succession send them forth;
 Bound to establish new communities
 On every shore whose aspect favours hope
 Or bold adventure; promising to skill
 And perseverance their deserved reward.

 Yes," he continued, kindling as he spake,
 "Change wide, and deep, and silently performed,
 This Land shall witness; and as days roll on,
 Earth's universal frame shall feel the effect;
 Even till the smallest habitable rock,
 Beaten by lonely billows, hear the songs
 Of humanised society; and bloom
 With civil arts, that shall breathe forth their fragrance,
 A grateful tribute to all-ruling Heaven.
 From culture, unexclusively bestowed
 On Albion's noble Race in freedom born,
 Expect these mighty issues: from the pains
 And faithful care of unambitious schools
 Instructing simple childhood's ready ear:
 Thence look for these magnificent results!
 Vast the circumference of hope and ye
 Are at its centre, British Lawgivers;
 Ah! sleep not there in shame! Shall Wisdom's voice
 From out the bosom of these troubled times
 Repeat the dictates of her calmer mind,
 And shall the venerable halls ye fill
 Refuse to echo the sublime decree?
 Trust not to partial care a general good;
 Transfer not to futurity a work
 Of urgent need. Your Country must complete
 Her glorious destiny. Begin even now,
 Now, when oppression, like the Egyptian plague
 Of darkness, stretched o'er guilty Europe, makes
 The brightness more conspicuous that invests
 The happy Island where ye think and act;
 Now, when destruction is a prime pursuit,
 Show to the wretched nations for what end
 The powers of civil polity were given."

 Abruptly here, but with a graceful air,
 The Sage broke off. No sooner had he ceased
 Than, looking forth, the gentle Lady said,
 "Behold the shades of afternoon have fallen
 Upon this flowery slope; and see beyond
 The silvery lake is streaked with placid blue;
 As if preparing for the peace of evening.
 How temptingly the landscape shines! The air
 Breathes invitation; easy is the walk
 To the lake's margin, where a boat lies moored
 Under a sheltering tree." Upon this hint
 We rose together; all were pleased; but most
 The beauteous girl, whose cheek was flushed with joy.
 Light as a sunbeam glides along the hills
 She vanished eager to impart the scheme
 To her loved brother and his shy compeer.
 Now was there bustle in the Vicar's house
 And earnest preparation. Forth we went,
 And down the vale along the streamlet's edge
 Pursued our way, a broken company,
 Mute or conversing, single or in pairs.
 Thus having reached a bridge, that overarched
 The hasty rivulet where it lay becalmed
 In a deep pool, by happy chance we saw
 A twofold image; on a grassy bank
 A snow-white ram, and in the crystal flood
 Another and the same! Most beautiful,
 On the green turf, with his imperial front
 Shaggy and bold, and wreathed horns superb,
 The breathing creature stood; as beautiful,
 Beneath him, showed his shadowy counterpart.
 Each had his glowing mountains, each his sky,
 And each seemed centre of his own fair world:
 Antipodes unconscious of each other,
 Yet, in partition, with their several spheres,
 Blended in perfect stillness, to our sight!

 "Ah! what a pity were it to disperse,
 Or to disturb, so fair a spectacle,
 And yet a breath can do it!"
 These few words
 The Lady whispered, while we stood and gazed
 Gathered together, all in still delight,
 Not without awe. Thence passing on, she said
 In like low voice to my particular ear,
 "I love to hear that eloquent old Man
 Pour forth his meditations, and descant
 On human life from infancy to age.
 How pure his spirit! in what vivid hues
 His mind gives back the various forms of things,
 Caught in their fairest, happiest, attitude!
 While he is speaking, I have power to see
 Even as he sees; but when his voice hath ceased,
 Then, with a sigh, sometimes I feel, as now,
 That combinations so serene and bright
 Cannot be lasting in a world like ours,
 Whose highest beauty, beautiful as it is,
 Like that reflected in yon quiet pool,
 Seems but a fleeting sunbeam's gift, whose peace,
 The sufferance only of a breath of air!"

 More had she said but sportive shouts were heard
 Sent from the jocund hearts of those two Boys,
 Who, bearing each a basket on his arm,
 Down the green field came tripping after us.
 With caution we embarked; and now the pair
 For prouder service were addrest; but each,
 Wishful to leave an opening for my choice,
 Dropped the light oar his eager hand had seized.
 Thanks given for that becoming courtesy,
 Their place I took and for a grateful office
 Pregnant with recollections of the time
 When, on thy bosom, spacious Windermere!
 A Youth, I practised this delightful art;
 Tossed on the waves alone, or 'mid a crew
 Of joyous comrades. Soon as the reedy marge
 Was cleared, I dipped, with arms accordant, oars
 Free from obstruction; and the boat advanced
 Through crystal water, smoothly as a hawk,
 That, disentangled from the shady boughs
 Of some thick wood, her place of covert, cleaves
 With correspondent wings the abyss of air.
 "Observe," the Vicar said, "yon rocky isle
 With birch-trees fringed; my hand shall guide the helm,
 While thitherward we shape our course; or while
 We seek that other, on the western shore;
 Where the bare columns of those lofty firs,
 Supporting gracefully a massy dome
 Of sombre foliage, seem to imitate
 A Grecian temple rising from the Deep."

 "Turn where we may," said I, "we cannot err
 In this delicious region." Cultured slopes,
 Wild tracts of forest-ground, and scattered groves,
 And mountains bare, or clothed with ancient woods,
 Surrounded us; and, as we held our way
 Along the level of the glassy flood,
 They ceased not to surround us; change of place
 From kindred features diversely combined,
 Producing change of beauty ever new.
 Ah! that such beauty, varying in the light
 Of living nature, cannot be portrayed
 By words, nor by the pencil's silent skill;
 But is the property of him alone
 Who hath beheld it, noted it with care,
 And in his mind recorded it with love!
 Suffice it, therefore, if the rural Muse
 Vouchsafe sweet influence, while her Poet speaks
 Of trivial occupations well devised,
 And unsought pleasures springing up by chance;
 As if some friendly Genius had ordained
 That, as the day thus far had been enriched
 By acquisition of sincere delight,
 The same should be continued to its close.

 One spirit animating old and young,
 A gipsy-fire we kindled on the shore
 Of the fair Isle with birch-trees fringed and there,
 Merrily seated in a ring, partook
 A choice repast served by our young companions
 With rival earnestness and kindred glee.
 Launched from our hands the smooth stone skimmed the lake;
 With shouts we raised the echoes: stiller sounds
 The lovely Girl supplied a simple song,
 Whose low tones reached not to the distant rocks
 To be repeated thence, but gently sank
 Into our hearts; and charmed the peaceful flood.
 Rapaciously we gathered flowery spoils
 From land and water; lilies of each hue
 Golden and white, that float upon the waves,
 And court the wind; and leaves of that shy plant,
 (Her flowers were shed) the lily of the vale,
 That loves the ground, and from the sun withholds
 Her pensive beauty; from the breeze her sweets.

 Such product, and such pastime, did the place
 And season yield; but, as we re-embarked,
 Leaving, in quest of other scenes, the shore
 Of that wild spot, the Solitary said
 In a low voice, yet careless who might hear,
 "The fire, that burned so brightly to our wish,
 Where is it now? Deserted on the beach
 Dying, or dead! Nor shall the fanning breeze
 Revive its ashes. What care we for this,
 Whose ends are gained? Behold an emblem here
 Of one day's pleasure, and all mortal joys!
 And, in this unpremeditated slight
 Of that which is no longer needed, see
 The common course of human gratitude!"

 This plaintive note disturbed not the repose
 Of the still evening. Right across the lake
 Our pinnace moves; then, coasting creek and bay,
 Glades we behold, and into thickets peep,
 Where couch the spotted deer; or raised our eyes
 To shaggy steeps on which the careless goat
 Browsed by the side of dashing waterfalls;
 And thus the bark, meandering with the shore,
 Pursued her voyage, till a natural pier
 Of jutting rock invited us to land.

 Alert to follow as the Pastor led,
 We clomb a green hill's side; and, as we clomb,
 The Valley, opening out her bosom, gave
 Fair prospect, intercepted less and less,
 O'er the flat meadows and indented coast
 Of the smooth lake, in compass seen: far off,
 And yet conspicuous, stood the old Church-tower,
 In majesty presiding over fields
 And habitations seemingly preserved
 From all intrusion of the restless world
 By rocks impassable and mountains huge.

 Soft heath this elevated spot supplied,
 And choice of moss-clad stones, whereon we couched
 Or sate reclined; admiring quietly
 The general aspect of the scene; but each
 Not seldom over anxious to make known
 His own discoveries; or to favourite points
 Directing notice, merely from a wish
 To impart a joy, imperfect while unshared.
 That rapturous moment never shall I forget
 When these particular interests were effaced
 From every mind! Already had the sun,
 Sinking with less than ordinary state,
 Attained his western bound; but rays of light
 Now suddenly diverging from the orb
 Retired behind the mountain tops or veiled
 By the dense air shot upwards to the crown
 Of the blue firmament aloft, and wide:
 And multitudes of little floating clouds,
 Through their ethereal texture pierced ere we,
 Who saw, of change were conscious had become
 Vivid as fire; clouds separately poised,
 Innumerable multitude of forms
 Scattered through half the circle of the sky;
 And giving back, and shedding each on each,
 With prodigal communion, the bright hues
 Which from the unapparent fount of glory
 They had imbibed, and ceased not to receive.
 That which the heavens displayed, the liquid deep
 Repeated; but with unity sublime!

 While from the grassy mountain's open side
 We gazed, in silence hushed, with eyes intent
 On the refulgent spectacle, diffused
 Through earth, sky, water, and all visible space,
 The Priest in holy transport thus exclaimed:
 "Eternal Spirit! universal God!
 Power inaccessible to human thought,
 Save by degrees and steps which thou hast deigned
 To furnish; for this effluence of thyself,
 To the infirmity of mortal sense
 Vouchsafed; this local transitory type
 Of thy paternal splendours, and the pomp
 Of those who fill thy courts in highest heaven,
 The radiant Cherubim; accept the thanks
 Which we, thy humble Creatures, here convened,
 Presume to offer; we, who from the breast
 Of the frail earth, permitted to behold
 The faint reflections only of thy face
 Are yet exalted, and in soul adore!
 Such as they are who in thy presence stand
 Unsullied, incorruptible, and drink
 Imperishable majesty streamed forth
 From thy empyreal throne, the elect of earth
 Shall be divested at the appointed hour
 Of all dishonour, cleansed from mortal stain.
 Accomplish, then, their number; and conclude
 Time's weary course! Or if, by thy decree,
 The consummation that will come by stealth
 Be yet far distant, let thy Word prevail,
 Oh! let thy Word prevail, to take away
 The sting of human nature. Spread the law,
 As it is written in thy holy book,
 Throughout all lands; let every nation hear
 The high behest, and every heart obey;
 Both for the love of purity, and hope
 Which it affords, to such as do thy will
 And persevere in good, that they shall rise,
 To have a nearer view of thee, in heaven.
 Father of good! this prayer in bounty grant,
 In mercy grant it, to thy wretched sons.
 Then, not till then, shall persecution cease,
 And cruel wars expire. The way is marked,
 The guide appointed, and the ransom paid.
 Alas! the nations, who of yore received
 These tidings, and in Christian temples meet
 The sacred truth to knowledge, linger still;
 Preferring bonds and darkness to a state
 Of holy freedom, by redeeming love
 Proffered to all, while yet on earth detained.

 So fare the many; and the thoughtful few,
 Who in the anguish of their souls bewail
 This dire perverseness, cannot choose but ask,
 Shall it endure? Shall enmity and strife,
 Falsehood and guile, be left to sow their seed;
 And the kind never perish? Is the hope
 Fallacious, or shall righteousness obtain
 A peaceable dominion, wide as earth,
 And ne'er to fail? Shall that blest day arrive
 When they, whose choice or lot it is to dwell
 In crowded cities, without fear shall live
 Studious of mutual benefit; and he,
 Whom Morn awakens, among dews and flowers
 Of every clime, to till the lonely field,
 Be happy in himself? The law of faith
 Working through love, such conquest shall it gain,
 Such triumph over sin and guilt achieve?
 Almighty Lord, thy further grace impart!
 And with that help the wonder shall be seen
 Fulfilled, the hope accomplished; and thy praise
 Be sung with transport and unceasing joy.

 Once," and with mild demeanour, as he spake,
 On us the venerable Pastor turned
 His beaming eye that had been raised to Heaven,
 "Once, while the Name, Jehovah, was a sound
 Within the circuit of this sea-girt isle
 Unheard, the savage nations bowed the head
 To Gods delighting in remorseless deeds;
 Gods which themselves had fashioned, to promote
 Ill purposes, and flatter foul desires.
 Then, in the bosom of yon mountain-cove,
 To those inventions of corrupted man
 Mysterious rites were solemnised; and there
 Amid impending rocks and gloomy woods
 Of those terrific Idols some received
 Such dismal service, that the loudest voice
 Of the swoln cataracts (which now are heard
 Soft murmuring) was too weak to overcome,
 Though aided by wild winds, the groans and shrieks
 Of human victims, offered up to appease
 Or to propitiate. And, if living eyes
 Had visionary faculties to see
 The thing that hath been as the thing that is,
 Aghast we might behold this crystal Mere
 Bedimmed with smoke, in wreaths voluminous,
 Flung from the body of devouring fires,
 To Taranis erected on the heights
 By priestly hands, for sacrifice performed
 Exultingly, in view of open day
 And full assemblage of a barbarous host;
 Or to Andates, female Power! who gave
 (For so they fancied) glorious victory.
 A few rude monuments of mountain-stone
 Survive; all else is swept away. How bright
 The appearances of things! From such, how changed
 The existing worship; and with those compared,
 The worshippers how innocent and blest!
 So wide the difference, a willing mind
 Might almost think, at this affecting hour,
 That paradise, the lost abode of man,
 Was raised again: and to a happy few,
 In its original beauty, here restored.

 Whence but from thee, the true and only God,
 And from the faith derived through Him who bled
 Upon the cross, this marvellous advance
 Of good from evil; as if one extreme
 Were left, the other gained. O ye, who come
 To kneel devoutly in yon reverend Pile,
 Called to such office by the peaceful sound
 Of sabbath bells; and ye, who sleep in earth,
 All cares forgotten, round its hallowed walls!
 For you, in presence of this little band
 Gathered together on the green hill-side,
 Your Pastor is emboldened to prefer
 Vocal thanksgivings to the eternal King;
 Whose love, whose counsel, whose commands, have made
 Your very poorest rich in peace of thought
 And in good works; and him, who is endowed
 With scantiest knowledge, master of all truth
 Which the salvation of his soul requires.
 Conscious of that abundant favour showered
 On you, the children of my humble care,
 And this dear land, our country, while on earth
 We sojourn, have I lifted up my soul,
 Joy giving voice to fervent gratitude.
 These barren rocks, your stern inheritance;
 These fertile fields, that recompense your pains;
 The shadowy vale, the sunny mountain-top;
 Woods waving in the wind their lofty heads,
 Or hushed; the roaring waters and the still
 They see the offering of my lifted hands,
 They hear my lips present their sacrifice,
 They know if I be silent, morn or even:
 For, though in whispers speaking, the full heart
 Will find a vent; and thought is praise to him,
 Audible praise, to thee, omniscient Mind,
 From whom all gifts descend, all blessings flow!"

 This vesper-service closed, without delay,
 From that exalted station to the plain
 Descending, we pursued our homeward course,
 In mute composure, o'er the shadowy lake,
 Under a faded sky. No trace remained
 Of those celestial splendours; grey the vault
 Pure, cloudless, ether; and the star of eve
 Was wanting; but inferior lights appeared
 Faintly, too faint almost for sight; and some
 Above the darkened hills stood boldly forth
 In twinkling lustre, ere the boat attained
 Her mooring-place; where, to the sheltering tree,
 Our youthful Voyagers bound fast her prow,
 With prompt yet careful hands. This done, we paced
 The dewy fields; but ere the Vicar's door
 Was reached, the Solitary checked his steps;
 Then, intermingling thanks, on each bestowed
 A farewell salutation; and, the like
 Receiving, took the slender path that leads
 To the one cottage in the lonely dell:
 But turned not without welcome promise made
 That he would share the pleasures and pursuits
 Of yet another summer's day, not loth
 To wander with us through the fertile vales,
 And o'er the mountain-wastes. "Another sun,"
 Said he, "shall shine upon us, ere we part;
 Another sun, and peradventure more;
 If time, with free consent, be yours to give,
 And season favours."
 To enfeebled Power,
 From this communion with uninjured Minds,
 What renovation had been brought; and what
 Degree of healing to a wounded spirit,
 Dejected, and habitually disposed
 To seek, in degradation of the Kind,
 Excuse and solace for her own defects;
 How far those erring notions were reformed;
 And whether aught, of tendency as good
 And pure, from further intercourse ensued;
 This if delightful hopes, as heretofore,
 Inspire the serious song, and gentle Hearts
 Cherish, and lofty Minds approve the past
 My future labours may not leave untold.
