---
author: William Lisle Bowles 
title: Song Of The Battle Of Hastings.
---

 The Norman armament beneath thy rocks, St Valerie,
 Is moored; and, streaming to the morn, three hundred banners fly,
 Of crimson silk; with golden cross, effulgent o'er the rest,
 That banner, proudest in the fleet, streams, which the Lord had blessed.
 The gale is fair, the sails are set, cheerily the south wind blows,
 And Norman archers, all in steel, have grasped their good yew-bows;
 Aloud the harpers strike their harps, whilst morning light is flung
 Upon the cross-bows and the shields, that round the masts are hung.
 Speed on, ye brave! 'tis William leads; bold barons, at his word,
 Lo! sixty thousand men of might for William draw the sword.

 So, bound to England's southern shore, we rolled upon the seas,
 And gallantly the white sails set were, and swelling to the breeze.
 On, on, to victory or death! now rose the general cry;
 The minstrels sang, On, on, ye brave, to death or victory!
 Mark yonder ship, how straight she steers; ye knights and barons brave,
 'Tis William's ship, and proud she rides, the foremost o'er the wave.
 And now we hailed the English coast, and, lo! on Beachy Head,
 The radiance of the setting sun majestical is shed.
 The fleet sailed on, till, Pevensey! we saw thy welcome strand;
 Duke William now his anchor casts, and dauntless leaps to land.

 The English host, by Harold led, at length appear in sight,
 And now they raise a deafening shout, and stand prepared for fight;
 The hostile legions halt a while, and their long lines display,
 Now front to front they stand, in still and terrible array.
 Give out the word, God, and our right! rush like a storm along,
 Lift up God's banner, and advance, resounding Roland's song!
 Ye spearmen, poise your lances well, by brave Montgomerie led,
 Ye archers, bend your bows, and draw your arrows to the head.
 They draw - the bent bows ring - huzzah! another flight, and hark!
 How the sharp arrowy shower beneath the sun goes hissing dark.

 Hark! louder grows the deadly strife, till all the battle-plain
 Is red with blood, and heaped around with men and horses slain.
 On, Normans, on! Duke William cried, and Harold, tremble thou,
 Now think upon thy perjury, and of thy broken vow.
 The banner of thy armed knight, thy shield, thy helm are vain - 
 The fatal shaft has sped, - by Heaven! it hisses in his brain!
 So William won the English crown, and all his foemen beat,
 And Harold, and his Britons brave, lay silent at his feet.
 Enough! the day is breaking, cried the King:
 Away! away! be armed at my side,
 Without attendants, and to horse, to horse!

