---
author: William Wordsworth 
title: The Excursion - Book Third - Despondency
---

 A humming bee a little tinkling rill 
 A pair of falcons wheeling on the wing,
 In clamorous agitation, round the crest
 Of a tall rock, their airy citadel 
 By each and all of these the pensive ear
 Was greeted, in the silence that ensued,
 When through the cottage-threshold we had passed,
 And, deep within that lonesome valley, stood
 Once more beneath the concave of a blue
 And cloudless sky. Anon exclaimed our Host 
 Triumphantly dispersing with the taunt
 The shade of discontent which on his brow
 Had gathered, "Ye have left my cell, but see
 How Nature hems you in with friendly arms!
 And by her help ye are my prisoners still.
 But which way shall I lead you? how contrive,
 In spot so parsimoniously endowed,
 That the brief hours, which yet remain, may reap
 Some recompense of knowledge or delight?"
 So saying, round he looked, as if perplexed; 
 And, to remove those doubts, my grey-haired Friend
 Said "Shall we take this pathway for our guide? 
 Upward it winds, as if, in summer heats,
 Its line had first been fashioned by the flock
 Seeking a place of refuge at the root
 Of yon black Yew-tree, whose protruded boughs
 Darken the silver bosom of the crag,
 From which she draws her meagre sustenance.
 There in commodious shelter may we rest.
 Or let us trace this streamlet to its source; 
 Feebly it tinkles with an earthy sound,
 And a few steps may bring us to the spot
 Where, haply, crowned with flowerets and green herbs,
 The mountain infant to the sun comes forth,
 Like human life from darkness." A quick turn
 Through a strait passage of encumbered ground,
 Proved that such hope was vain: for now we stood
 Shut out from prospect of the open vale,
 And saw the water, that composed this rill,
 Descending, disembodied, and diffused 
 O'er the smooth surface of an ample crag,
 Lofty, and steep, and naked as a tower.
 All further progress here was barred; And who,
 Thought I, if master of a vacant hour,
 Here would not linger, willingly detained?
 Whether to such wild objects he were led
 When copious rains have magnified the stream
 Into a loud and white-robed waterfall,
 Or introduced at this more quiet time.

 Upon a semicirque of turf-clad ground, 
 The hidden nook discovered to our view
 A mass of rock, resembling, as it lay
 Right at the foot of that moist precipice,
 A stranded ship, with keel upturned, that rests
 Fearless of winds and waves. Three several stones
 Stood near, of smaller size, and not unlike
 To monumental pillars: and, from these
 Some little space disjoined a pair were seen,
 That with united shoulders bore aloft
 A fragment, like an altar, flat and smooth: 
 Barren the tablet, yet thereon appeared
 A tall and shining holly, that had found
 A hospitable chink, and stood upright,
 As if inserted by some human hand
 In mockery, to wither in the sun,
 Or lay its beauty flat before a breeze,
 The first that entered. But no breeze did now
 Find entrance; high or low appeared no trace
 Of motion, save the water that descended,
 Diffused adown that barrier of steep rock, 
 And softly creeping, like a breath of air,
 Such as is sometimes seen, and hardly seen,
 To brush the still breast of a crystal lake.

 "Behold a cabinet for sages built,
 Which kings might envy!" Praise to this effect
 Broke from the happy old Man's reverend lip;
 Who to the Solitary turned, and said,
 "In sooth, with love's familiar privilege,
 You have decried the wealth which is your own.
 Among these rocks and stones, methinks, I see 
 More than the heedless impress that belongs
 To lonely nature's casual work: they bear
 A semblance strange of power intelligent,
 And of design not wholly worn away.
 Boldest of plants that ever faced the wind,
 How gracefully that slender shrub looks forth
 From its fantastic birth-place! And I own,
 Some shadowy intimations haunt me here,
 That in these shows a chronicle survives
 Of purposes akin to those of Man, 
 But wrought with mightier arm than now prevails.
 Voiceless the stream descends into the gulf
 With timid lapse; and lo! while in this strait
 I stand the chasm of sky above my head
 Is heaven's profoundest azure; no domain
 For fickle, short-lived clouds to occupy,
 Or to pass through; but rather an abyss
 In which the everlasting stars abide;
 And whose soft gloom, and boundless depth, might tempt
 The curious eye to look for them by day. 
 Hail Contemplation! from the stately towers,
 Reared by the industrious hand of human art
 To lift thee high above the misty air
 And turbulence of murmuring cities vast;
 From academic groves, that have for thee
 Been planted, hither come and find a lodge
 To which thou mayst resort for holier peace, 
 From whose calm centre thou, through height or depth,
 Mayst penetrate, wherever truth shall lead;
 Measuring through all degrees, until the scale 
 Of time and conscious nature disappear,
 Lost in unsearchable eternity!"

 A pause ensued; and with minuter care
 We scanned the various features of the scene:
 And soon the Tenant of that lonely vale
 With courteous voice thus spake 
 "I should have grieved
 Hereafter, not escaping self-reproach,
 If from my poor retirement ye had gone
 Leaving this nook unvisited: but, in sooth,
 Your unexpected presence had so roused 
 My spirits, that they were bent on enterprise;
 And, like an ardent hunter, I forgot,
 Or, shall I say? disdained, the game that lurks
 At my own door. The shapes before our eyes
 And their arrangement, doubtless must be deemed
 The sport of Nature, aided by blind Chance
 Rudely to mock the works of toiling Man.
 And hence, this upright shaft of unhewn stone,
 From Fancy, willing to set off her stores
 By sounding titles, hath acquired the name 
 Of Pompey's pillar; that I gravely style
 My Theban obelisk; and, there, behold
 A Druid cromlech! thus I entertain
 The antiquarian humour, and am pleased
 To skim along the surfaces of things,
 Beguiling harmlessly the listless hours.
 But if the spirit be oppressed by sense
 Of instability, revolt, decay,
 And change, and emptiness, these freaks of Nature
 And her blind helper Chance, do 'then' suffice 
 To quicken, and to aggravate to feed
 Pity and scorn, and melancholy pride,
 Not less than that huge Pile (from some abyss
 Of mortal power unquestionably sprung)
 Whose hoary diadem of pendent rocks
 Confines the shrill-voiced whirlwind, round and round
 Eddying within its vast circumference,
 On Sarum's naked plain than pyramid
 Of Egypt, unsubverted, undissolved 
 Or Syria's marble ruins towering high 
 Above the sandy desert, in the light
 Of sun or moon. Forgive me, if I say
 That an appearance which hath raised your minds
 To an exalted pitch (the self-same cause
 Different effect producing) is for me
 Fraught rather with depression than delight,
 Though shame it were, could I not look around,
 By the reflection of your pleasure, pleased.
 Yet happier in my judgment, even than you
 With your bright transports fairly may be deemed, 
 The wandering Herbalist, who, clear alike
 From vain, and, that worse evil, vexing thoughts,
 Casts, if he ever chance to enter here,
 Upon these uncouth Forms a slight regard
 Of transitory interest, and peeps round
 For some rare floweret of the hills, or plant
 Of craggy fountain; what he hopes for wins,
 Or learns, at least, that 'tis not to be won:
 Then, keen and eager, as a fine-nosed hound,
 By soul-engrossing instinct driven along 
 Through wood or open field, the harmless Man
 Departs, intent upon his onward quest! 
 Nor is that Fellow-wanderer, so deem I,
 Less to be envied, (you may trace him oft
 By scars which his activity has left
 Beside our roads and pathways, though, thank Heaven!
 This covert nook reports not of his hand)
 He who with pocket-hammer smites the edge
 Of luckless rock or prominent stone, disguised
 In weather-stains or crusted o'er by Nature 
 With her first growths, detaching by the stroke
 A chip or splinter to resolve his doubts;
 And, with that ready answer satisfied,
 The substance classes by some barbarous name,
 And hurries on; or from the fragments picks
 His specimen, if but haply interveined
 With sparkling mineral, or should crystal cube
 Lurk in its cells and thinks himself enriched,
 Wealthier, and doubtless wiser, than before!
 Intrusted safely each to his pursuit, 
 Earnest alike, let both from hill to hill
 Range; if it please them, speed from clime to clime;
 The mind is full and free from pain their pastime."

 "Then," said I, interposing, "One is near,
 Who cannot but possess in your esteem
 Place worthier still of envy. May I name,
 Without offence, that fair-faced cottage-boy?
 Dame Nature's pupil of the lowest form,
 Youngest apprentice in the school of art!
 Him, as we entered from the open glen, 
 You might have noticed, busily engaged,
 Heart, soul, and hands, in mending the defects
 Left in the fabric of a leaky dam
 Raised for enabling this penurious stream
 To turn a slender mill (that new-made plaything)
 For his delight the happiest he of all!"

 "Far happiest," answered the desponding Man,
 "If such as now he is, he might remain!
 Ah! what avails imagination high
 Or question deep? what profits all that earth, 
 Or heaven's blue vault, is suffered to put forth
 Of impulse or allurement, for the Soul
 To quit the beaten track of life, and soar
 Far as she finds a yielding element
 In past or future; far as she can go
 Through time or space if neither in the one,
 Nor in the other region, nor in aught
 That Fancy, dreaming o'er the map of things,
 Hath placed beyond these penetrable bounds,
 Words of assurance can be heard; if nowhere 
 A habitation, for consummate good,
 Or for progressive virtue, by the search
 Can be attained, a better sanctuary
 From doubt and sorrow, than the senseless grave?"

 "Is this," the grey-haired Wanderer mildly said,
 "The voice, which we so lately overheard,
 To that same child, addressing tenderly
 The consolations of a hopeful mind?
 'His body is at rest, his soul in heaven.'
 These were your words; and, verily, methinks 
 Wisdom is oft-times nearer when we stoop
 Than when we soar." 
 The Other, not displeased,
 Promptly replied "My notion is the same.
 And I, without reluctance, could decline
 All act of inquisition whence we rise,
 And what, when breath hath ceased, we may become.
 Here are we, in a bright and breathing world.
 Our origin, what matters it? In lack
 Of worthier explanation, say at once
 With the American (a thought which suits 
 The place where now we stand) that certain men
 Leapt out together from a rocky cave;
 And these were the first parents of mankind:
 Or, if a different image be recalled
 By the warm sunshine, and the jocund voice
 Of insects chirping out their careless lives
 On these soft beds of thyme-besprinkled turf,
 Choose, with the gay Athenian, a conceit
 As sound blithe race! whose mantles were bedecked
 With golden grasshoppers, in sign that they 
 Had sprung, like those bright creatures, from the soil
 Whereon their endless generations dwelt.
 But stop! these theoretic fancies jar
 On serious minds: then, as the Hindoos draw
 Their holy Ganges from a skiey fount,
 Even so deduce the stream of human life
 From seats of power divine; and hope, or trust,
 That our existence winds her stately course
 Beneath the sun, like Ganges, to make part
 Of a living ocean; or, to sink engulfed, 
 Like Niger, in impenetrable sands
 And utter darkness: thought which may be faced,
 Though comfortless! 
 Not of myself I speak;
 Such acquiescence neither doth imply,
 In me, a meekly-bending spirit soothed
 By natural piety; nor a lofty mind,
 By philosophic discipline prepared
 For calm subjection to acknowledged law;
 Pleased to have been, contented not to be.
 Such palms I boast not; no! to me, who find 
 Reviewing my past way, much to condemn,
 Little to praise, and nothing to regret,
 (Save some remembrances of dream-like joys
 That scarcely seem to have belonged to me)
 If I must take my choice between the pair
 That rule alternately the weary hours,
 Night is than day more acceptable; sleep
 Doth, in my estimate of good, appear
 A better state than waking; death than sleep:
 Feelingly sweet is stillness after storm, 
 Though under covert of the wormy ground!

 Yet be it said, in justice to myself,
 That in more genial times, when I was free
 To explore the destiny of human kind
 (Not as an intellectual game pursued
 With curious subtilty, from wish to cheat
 Irksome sensations; but by love of truth
 Urged on, or haply by intense delight
 In feeding thought, wherever thought could feed)
 I did not rank with those (too dull or nice, 
 For to my judgment such they then appeared,
 Or too aspiring, thankless at the best)
 Who, in this frame of human life, perceive
 An object whereunto their souls are tied
 In discontented wedlock; nor did e'er,
 From me, those dark impervious shades, that hang
 Upon the region whither we are bound,
 Exclude a power to enjoy the vital beams
 Of present sunshine. Deities that float
 On wings, angelic Spirits! I could muse 
 O'er what from eldest time we have been told
 Of your bright forms and glorious faculties,
 And with the imagination rest content,
 Not wishing more; repining not to tread
 The little sinuous path of earthly care,
 By flowers embellished, and by springs refreshed.
 'Blow winds of autumn! let your chilling breath
 'Take the live herbage from the mead, and strip
 'The shady forest of its green attire, 
 'And let the bursting clouds to fury rouse 
 'The gentle brooks! Your desolating sway,
 'Sheds,' I exclaimed, 'no sadness upon me,
 'And no disorder in your rage I find.
 'What dignity, what beauty, in this change
 'From mild to angry, and from sad to gay,
 'Alternate and revolving! How benign,
 'How rich in animation and delight,
 'How bountiful these elements compared
 'With aught, as more desirable and fair,
 'Devised by fancy for the golden age; 
 'Or the perpetual warbling that prevails
 'In Arcady, beneath unaltered skies,
 'Through the long year in constant quiet bound,
 'Night hushed as night, and day serene as day!'
 But why this tedious record? Age, we know
 Is garrulous; and solitude is apt
 To anticipate the privilege of Age,
 From far ye come; and surely with a hope
 Of better entertainment: let us hence!"

 Loth to forsake the spot, and still more loth 
 To be diverted from our present theme,
 I said, "My thoughts, agreeing, Sir, with yours,
 Would push this censure farther; for, if smiles
 Of scornful pity be the just reward
 Of Poesy thus courteously employed
 In framing models to improve the scheme
 Of Man's existence, and recast the world,
 Why should not grave Philosophy be styled,
 Herself, a dreamer of a kindred stock,
 A dreamer yet more spiritless and dull? 
 Yes, shall the fine immunities she boasts
 Establish sounder titles of esteem
 For her, who (all too timid and reserved
 For onset, for resistance too inert,
 Too weak for suffering, and for hope too tame)
 Placed, among flowery gardens curtained round
 With world-excluding groves, the brotherhood
 Of soft Epicureans, taught if they
 The ends of being would secure, and win
 The crown of wisdom to yield up their souls 
 To a voluptuous unconcern, preferring
 Tranquillity to all things. Or is she,"
 I cried, "more worthy of regard, the Power,
 Who, for the sake of sterner quiet, closed
 The Stoic's heart against the vain approach
 Of admiration, and all sense of joy?"

 His countenance gave notice that my zeal
 Accorded little with his present mind;
 I ceased, and he resumed. "Ah! gentle Sir,
 Slight, if you will, the 'means'; but spare to slight 
 The 'end' of those, who did, by system, rank,
 As the prime object of a wise man's aim,
 Security from shock of accident,
 Release from fear; and cherished peaceful days
 For their own sakes, as mortal life's chief good,
 And only reasonable felicity.
 What motive drew, what impulse, I would ask,
 Through a long course of later ages, drove,
 The hermit to his cell in forest wide;
 Or what detained him, till his closing eyes 
 Took their last farewell of the sun and stars,
 Fast anchored in the desert? Not alone
 Dread of the persecuting sword, remorse,
 Wrongs unredressed, or insults unavenged
 And unavengeable, defeated pride,
 Prosperity subverted, maddening want,
 Friendship betrayed, affection unreturned,
 Love with despair, or grief in agony; 
 Not always from intolerable pangs
 He fled; but, compassed round by pleasure, sighed 
 For independent happiness; craving peace,
 The central feeling of all happiness,
 Not as a refuge from distress or pain,
 A breathing-time, vacation, or a truce,
 But for its absolute self; a life of peace,
 Stability without regret or fear;
 That hath been, is, and shall be evermore! 
 Such the reward he sought; and wore out life,
 There, where on few external things his heart
 Was set, and those his own; or, if not his, 
 Subsisting under nature's stedfast law.

 What other yearning was the master tie
 Of the monastic brotherhood, upon rock
 Aerial, or in green secluded vale,
 One after one, collected from afar,
 An undissolving fellowship? What but this,
 The universal instinct of repose,
 The longing for confirmed tranquillity,
 Inward and outward; humble, yet sublime:
 The life where hope and memory are as one; 
 Where earth is quiet and her face unchanged
 Save by the simplest toil of human hands
 Or seasons' difference; the immortal Soul
 Consistent in self-rule; and heaven revealed
 To meditation in that quietness! 
 Such was their scheme: and though the wished-for end
 By multitudes was missed, perhaps attained
 By none, they for the attempt, and pains employed,
 Do, in my present censure, stand redeemed
 From the unqualified disdain, that once 
 Would have been cast upon them by my voice
 Delivering her decisions from the seat
 Of forward youth that scruples not to solve
 Doubts, and determine questions, by the rules
 Of inexperienced judgment, ever prone
 To overweening faith; and is inflamed,
 By courage, to demand from real life
 The test of act and suffering, to provoke
 Hostility how dreadful when it comes,
 Whether affliction be the foe, or guilt! 

 A child of earth, I rested, in that stage
 Of my past course to which these thoughts advert,
 Upon earth's native energies; forgetting
 That mine was a condition which required
 Nor energy, nor fortitude a calm
 Without vicissitude; which, if the like
 Had been presented to my view elsewhere,
 I might have even been tempted to despise.
 But no for the serene was also bright;
 Enlivened happiness with joy o'erflowing, 
 With joy, and oh! that memory should survive
 To speak the word with rapture! Nature's boon,
 Life's genuine inspiration, happiness
 Above what rules can teach, or fancy feign;
 Abused, as all possessions 'are' abused
 That are not prized according to their worth.
 And yet, what worth? what good is given to men,
 More solid than the gilded clouds of heaven?
 What joy more lasting than a vernal flower? 
 None! 'tis the general plaint of human kind 
 In solitude: and mutually addressed
 From each to all, for wisdom's sake: This truth
 The priest announces from his holy seat:
 And, crowned with garlands in the summer grove,
 The poet fits it to his pensive lyre.
 Yet, ere that final resting-place be gained,
 Sharp contradictions may arise, by doom
 Of this same life, compelling us to grieve
 That the prosperities of love and joy
 Should be permitted, oft-times, to endure 
 So long, and be at once cast down for ever.
 Oh! tremble, ye, to whom hath been assigned
 A course of days composing happy months,
 And they as happy years; the present still
 So like the past, and both so firm a pledge
 Of a congenial future, that the wheels
 Of pleasure move without the aid of hope:
 For Mutability is Nature's bane;
 And slighted Hope 'will' be avenged; and, when
 Ye need her favours, ye shall find her not; 
 But in her stead fear doubt and agony!"

 This was the bitter language of the heart:
 But, while he spake, look, gesture, tone of voice,
 Though discomposed and vehement, were such
 As skill and graceful nature might suggest
 To a proficient of the tragic scene
 Standing before the multitude, beset
 With dark events. Desirous to divert
 Or stem the current of the speaker's thoughts,
 We signified a wish to leave that place 
 Of stillness and close privacy, a nook
 That seemed for self-examination made;
 Or, for confession, in the sinner's need,
 Hidden from all men's view. To our attempt
 He yielded not; but, pointing to a slope
 Of mossy turf defended from the sun,
 And on that couch inviting us to rest,
 Full on that tender-hearted Man he turned
 A serious eye, and his speech thus renewed.

 "You never saw, your eyes did never look 
 On the bright form of Her whom once I loved: 
 Her silver voice was heard upon the earth,
 A sound unknown to you; else, honoured Friend!
 Your heart had borne a pitiable share
 Of what I suffered, when I wept that loss,
 And suffer now, not seldom, from the thought
 That I remember, and can weep no more. 
 Stripped as I am of all the golden fruit
 Of self-esteem; and by the cutting blasts
 Of self-reproach familiarly assailed; 
 Yet would I not be of such wintry bareness
 But that some leaf of your regard should hang
 Upon my naked branches: lively thoughts
 Give birth, full often, to unguarded words;
 I grieve that, in your presence, from my tongue
 Too much of frailty hath already dropped;
 But that too much demands still more.
 You know,
 Revered Compatriot and to you, kind Sir,
 (Not to be deemed a stranger, as you come
 Following the guidance of these welcome feet 
 To our secluded vale) it may be told 
 That my demerits did not sue in vain
 To One on whose mild radiance many gazed
 With hope, and all with pleasure. This fair Bride 
 In the devotedness of youthful love,
 Preferring me to parents, and the choir
 Of gay companions, to the natal roof,
 And all known places and familiar sights
 (Resigned with sadness gently weighing down
 Her trembling expectations, but no more 
 Than did to her due honour, and to me
 Yielded, that day, a confidence sublime
 In what I had to build upon) this Bride,
 Young, modest, meek, and beautiful, I led
 To a low cottage in a sunny bay,
 Where the salt sea innocuously breaks,
 And the sea breeze as innocently breathes,
 On Devon's leafy shores; a sheltered hold,
 In a soft clime encouraging the soil
 To a luxuriant bounty! As our steps 
 Approach the embowered abode our chosen seat 
 See, rooted in the earth, her kindly bed,
 The unendangered myrtle, decked with flowers,
 Before the threshold stands to welcome us!
 While, in the flowering myrtle's neighbourhood,
 Not overlooked but courting no regard,
 Those native plants, the holly and the yew,
 Gave modest intimation to the mind
 How willingly their aid they would unite
 With the green myrtle, to endear the hours 
 Of winter, and protect that pleasant place.
 Wild were the walks upon those lonely Downs,
 Track leading into track; how marked, how worn
 Into bright verdure, between fern and gorse
 Winding away its never-ending line
 On their smooth surface, evidence was none;
 But, there, lay open to our daily haunt,
 A range of unappropriated earth,
 Where youth's ambitious feet might move at large;
 Whence, unmolested wanderers, we beheld 
 The shining giver of the day diffuse
 His brightness o'er a tract of sea and land
 Gay as our spirits, free as our desires;
 As our enjoyments, boundless. From those heights
 We dropped, at pleasure, into sylvan combs;
 Where arbours of impenetrable shade,
 And mossy seats, detained us side by side,
 With hearts at ease, and knowledge in our hearts
 'That all the grove and all the day was ours.'

 O happy time! still happier was at hand; 
 For Nature called my Partner to resign
 Her share in the pure freedom of that life,
 Enjoyed by us in common. To my hope,
 To my heart's wish, my tender Mate became
 The thankful captive of maternal bonds;
 And those wild paths were left to me alone.
 There could I meditate on follies past;
 And, like a weary voyager escaped
 From risk and hardship, inwardly retrace
 A course of vain delights and thoughtless guilt, 
 And self-indulgence without shame pursued.
 There, undisturbed, could think of and could thank
 Her whose submissive spirit was to me
 Rule and restraint my guardian shall I say
 That earthly Providence, whose guiding love
 Within a port of rest had lodged me safe;
 Safe from temptation, and from danger far?
 Strains followed of acknowledgment addressed
 To an authority enthroned above
 The reach of sight; from whom, as from their source 
 Proceed all visible ministers of good
 That walk the earth Father of heaven and earth,
 Father, and king, and judge, adored and feared!
 These acts of mind, and memory, and heart,
 And spirit interrupted and relieved
 By observations transient as the glance
 Of flying sunbeams, or to the outward form
 Cleaving with power inherent and intense,
 As the mute insect fixed upon the plant
 On whose soft leaves it hangs, and from whose cup 
 It draws its nourishment imperceptibly 
 Endeared my wanderings; and the mother's kiss
 And infant's smile awaited my return.

 In privacy we dwelt, a wedded pair,
 Companions daily, often all day long;
 Not placed by fortune within easy reach
 Of various intercourse, nor wishing aught
 Beyond the allowance of our own fire-side,
 The twain within our happy cottage born,
 Inmates, and heirs of our united love; 
 Graced mutually by difference of sex,
 And with no wider interval of time
 Between their several births than served for one
 To establish something of a leader's sway;
 Yet left them joined by sympathy in age;
 Equals in pleasure, fellows in pursuit.
 On these two pillars rested as in air
 Our solitude.
 It soothes me to perceive,
 Your courtesy withholds not from my words
 Attentive audience. But, oh! gentle Friends, 
 As times of quiet and unbroken peace,
 Though, for a nation, times of blessedness,
 Give back faint echoes from the historian's page;
 So, in the imperfect sounds of this discourse,
 Depressed I hear, how faithless is the voice
 Which those most blissful days reverberate.
 What special record can, or need, be given
 To rules and habits, whereby much was done,
 But all within the sphere of little things;
 Of humble, though, to us, important cares, 
 And precious interests? Smoothly did our life
 Advance, swerving not from the path prescribed;
 Her annual, her diurnal, round alike!
 Maintained with faithful care. And you divine
 The worst effects that our condition saw
 If you imagine changes slowly wrought,
 And in their progress unperceivable;
 Not wished for; sometimes noticed with a sigh,
 (Whate'er of good or lovely they might bring)
 Sighs of regret, for the familiar good 
 And loveliness endeared which they removed.

 Seven years of occupation undisturbed
 Established seemingly a right to hold
 That happiness; and use and habit gave,
 To what an alien spirit had acquired,
 A patrimonial sanctity. And thus,
 With thoughts and wishes bounded to this world,
 I lived and breathed; most grateful if to enjoy
 Without repining or desire for more,
 For different lot, or change to higher sphere, 
 (Only except some impulses of pride
 With no determined object, though upheld
 By theories with suitable support) 
 Most grateful, if in such wise to enjoy
 Be proof of gratitude for what we have;
 Else, I allow, most thankless. But, at once,
 From some dark seat of fatal power was urged
 A claim that shattered all. Our blooming girl,
 Caught in the gripe of death, with such brief time
 To struggle in as scarcely would allow 
 Her cheek to change its colour, was conveyed
 From us to inaccessible worlds, to regions
 Where height, or depth, admits not the approach
 Of living man, though longing to pursue.
 With even as brief a warning and how soon,
 With what short interval of time between,
 I tremble yet to think of our last prop,
 Our happy life's only remaining stay 
 The brother followed; and was seen no more!

 Calm as a frozen lake when ruthless winds 
 Blow fiercely, agitating earth and sky,
 The Mother now remained; as if in her,
 Who, to the lowest region of the soul,
 Had been erewhile unsettled and disturbed,
 This second visitation had no power
 To shake; but only to bind up and seal;
 And to establish thankfulness of heart
 In Heaven's determinations, ever just.
 The eminence whereon her spirit stood,
 Mine was unable to attain. Immense 
 The space that severed us! But, as the sight
 Communicates with heaven's ethereal orbs
 Incalculably distant; so, I felt
 That consolation may descend from far
 (And that is intercourse, and union, too,)
 While, overcome with speechless gratitude,
 And, with a holier love inspired, I looked
 On her at once superior to my woes
 And partner of my loss. O heavy change,
 Dimness o'er this clear luminary crept 
 Insensibly; the immortal and divine
 Yielded to mortal reflux; her pure glory,
 As from the pinnacle of worldly state
 Wretched ambition drops astounded, fell
 Into a gulf obscure of silent grief,
 And keen heart-anguish of itself ashamed,
 Yet obstinately cherishing itself:
 And, so consumed, she melted from my arms;
 And left me, on this earth, disconsolate!

 What followed cannot be reviewed in thought; 
 Much less, retraced in words. If she, of life
 Blameless, so intimate with love and joy
 And all the tender motions of the soul,
 Had been supplanted, could I hope to stand 
 Infirm, dependent, and now destitute?
 I called on dreams and visions, to disclose
 That which is veiled from waking thought; conjured
 Eternity, as men constrain a ghost
 To appear and answer; to the grave I spake
 Imploringly; looked up, and asked the Heavens 
 If Angels traversed their cerulean floors,
 If fixed or wandering star could tidings yield
 Of the departed spirit what abode
 It occupies what consciousness retains
 Of former loves and interests. Then my soul
 Turned inward, to examine of what stuff
 Time's fetters are composed; and life was put
 To inquisition, long and profitless!
 By pain of heart now checked and now impelled 
 The intellectual power, through words and things, 
 Went sounding on, a dim and perilous way!
 And from those transports, and these toils abstruse,
 Some trace am I enabled to retain
 Of time, else lost; existing unto me
 Only by records in myself not found.

 From that abstraction I was roused, and how?
 Even as a thoughtful shepherd by a flash
 Of lightning startled in a gloomy cave
 Of these wild hills. For, lo! the dread Bastile,
 With all the chambers in its horrid towers, 
 Fell to the ground: by violence overthrown
 Of indignation; and with shouts that drowned
 The crash it made in falling! From the wreck
 A golden palace rose, or seemed to rise,
 The appointed seat of equitable law
 And mild paternal sway. The potent shock
 I felt: the transformation I perceived,
 As marvellously seized as in that moment
 When, from the blind mist issuing, I beheld
 Glory beyond all glory ever seen, 
 Confusion infinite of heaven and earth,
 Dazzling the soul. Meanwhile, prophetic harps
 In every grove were ringing, 'War shall cease;
 'Did ye not hear that conquest is abjured?
 'Bring garlands, bring forth choicest flowers, to deck
 'The tree of Liberty.' My heart rebounded;
 My melancholy voice the chorus joined;
 'Be joyful all ye nations; in all lands,
 'Ye that are capable of joy be glad!
 'Henceforth, whate'er is wanting to yourselves 
 'In others ye shall promptly find; and all,
 'Enriched by mutual and reflected wealth,
 'Shall with one heart honour their common kind.'

 Thus was I reconverted to the world;
 Society became my glittering bride,
 And airy hopes my children. From the depths
 Of natural passion, seemingly escaped,
 My soul diffused herself in wide embrace
 Of institutions, and the forms of things;
 As they exist, in mutable array, 
 Upon life's surface. What, though in my veins
 There flowed no Gallic blood, nor had I breathed
 The air of France, not less than Gallic zeal
 Kindled and burnt among the sapless twigs
 Of my exhausted heart. If busy men
 In sober conclave met, to weave a web
 Of amity, whose living threads should stretch
 Beyond the seas, and to the farthest pole,
 There did I sit, assisting. If, with noise
 And acclamation, crowds in open air 
 Expressed the tumult of their minds, my voice
 There mingled, heard or not. The powers of song
 I left not uninvoked; and, in still groves,
 Where mild enthusiasts tuned a pensive lay
 Of thanks and expectation, in accord
 With their belief, I sang Saturnian rule
 Returned, a progeny of golden years
 Permitted to descend, and bless mankind.
 With promises the Hebrew Scriptures teem:
 I felt their invitation; and resumed 
 A long-suspended office in the House
 Of public worship, where, the glowing phrase
 Of ancient inspiration serving me,
 I promised also, with undaunted trust
 Foretold, and added prayer to prophecy;
 The admiration winning of the crowd;
 The help desiring of the pure devout.

 Scorn and contempt forbid me to proceed!
 But History, time's slavish scribe, will tell
 How rapidly the zealots of the cause 
 Disbanded or in hostile ranks appeared;
 Some, tired of honest service; these, outdone,
 Disgusted therefore, or appalled, by aims
 Of fiercer zealots so confusion reigned,
 And the more faithful were compelled to exclaim,
 As Brutus did to Virtue, 'Liberty,
 'I worshipped thee, and find thee but a Shade!'

 Such recantation had for me no charm,
 Nor would I bend to it; who should have grieved
 At aught, however fair, that bore the mien 
 Of a conclusion, or catastrophe.
 Why then conceal, that, when the simply good
 In timid selfishness withdrew, I sought
 Other support, not scrupulous whence it came;
 And, by what compromise it stood, not nice?
 Enough if notions seemed to be high-pitched,
 And qualities determined. Among men
 So charactered did I maintain a strife
 Hopeless, and still more hopeless every hour;
 But, in the process, I began to feel 
 That, if the emancipation of the world
 Were missed, I should at least secure my own,
 And be in part compensated. For rights,
 Widely inveterately usurped upon,
 I spake with vehemence; and promptly seized
 All that Abstraction furnished for my needs
 Or purposes, nor scrupled to proclaim,
 And propagate, by liberty of life,
 Those new persuasions. Not that I rejoiced,
 Or even found pleasure, in such vagrant course, 
 For its own sake; but farthest from the walk
 Which I had trod in happiness and peace,
 Was most inviting to a troubled mind;
 That, in a struggling and distempered world,
 Saw a seductive image of herself.
 Yet, mark the contradictions of which Man
 Is still the sport! Here Nature was my guide,
 The Nature of the dissolute; but thee,
 O fostering Nature! I rejected smiled
 At others' tears in pity; and in scorn 
 At those, which thy soft influence sometimes drew
 From my unguarded heart. The tranquil shores
 Of Britain circumscribed me; else, perhaps
 I might have been entangled among deeds,
 Which, now, as infamous, I should abhor 
 Despise, as senseless: for my spirit relished
 Strangely the exasperation of that Land,
 Which turned an angry beak against the down
 Of her own breast; confounded into hope
 Of disencumbering thus her fretful wings. 

 But all was quieted by iron bonds
 Of military sway. The shifting aims,
 The moral interests, the creative might,
 The varied functions and high attributes
 Of civil action, yielded to a power
 Formal, and odious, and contemptible.
 In Britain, ruled a panic dread of change;
 The weak were praised, rewarded, and advanced;
 And, from the impulse of a just disdain,
 Once more did I retire into myself. 
 There feeling no contentment, I resolved
 To fly, for safeguard, to some foreign shore,
 Remote from Europe; from her blasted hopes;
 Her fields of carnage, and polluted air.

 Fresh blew the wind, when o'er the Atlantic Main
 The ship went gliding with her thoughtless crew;
 And who among them but an Exile, freed
 From discontent, indifferent, pleased to sit
 Among the busily-employed, not more
 With obligation charged, with service taxed, 
 Than the loose pendant to the idle wind
 Upon the tall mast streaming. But, ye Powers
 Of soul and sense mysteriously allied,
 Oh, never let the Wretched, if a choice
 Be left him, trust the freight of his distress
 To a long voyage on the silent deep!
 For, like a plague, will memory break out;
 And, in the blank and solitude of things,
 Upon his spirit, with a fever's strength,
 Will conscience prey. Feebly must they have felt 
 Who, in old time, attired with snakes and whips
 The vengeful Furies. 'Beautiful' regards
 Were turned on me the face of her I loved;
 The Wife and Mother pitifully fixing
 Tender reproaches, insupportable!
 Where now that boasted liberty? No welcome
 From unknown objects I received; and those,
 Known and familiar, which the vaulted sky
 Did, in the placid clearness of the night,
 Disclose, had accusations to prefer 
 Against my peace. Within the cabin stood
 That volume as a compass for the soul 
 Revered among the nations. I implored
 Its guidance; but the infallible support
 Of faith was wanting. Tell me, why refused
 To One by storms annoyed and adverse winds;
 Perplexed with currents; of his weakness sick;
 Of vain endeavours tired; and by his own,
 And by his nature's, ignorance, dismayed!

 Long-wished-for sight, the Western World appeared; 
 And, when the ship was moored, I leaped ashore
 Indignantly resolved to be a man,
 Who, having o'er the past no power, would live
 No longer in subjection to the past,
 With abject mind from a tyrannic lord
 Inviting penance, fruitlessly endured:
 So, like a fugitive, whose feet have cleared
 Some boundary, which his followers may not cross
 In prosecution of their deadly chase,
 Respiring I looked round. How bright the sun, 
 The breeze how soft! Can anything produced
 In the old World compare, thought I, for power
 And majesty with this gigantic stream,
 Sprung from the desert? And behold a city
 Fresh, youthful, and aspiring! What are these
 To me, or I to them? As much at least
 As he desires that they should be, whom winds
 And waves have wafted to this distant shore,
 In the condition of a damaged seed,
 Whose fibres cannot, if they would, take root. 
 Here may I roam at large; my business is,
 Roaming at large, to observe, and not to feel,
 And, therefore, not to act convinced that all
 Which bears the name of action, howsoe'er
 Beginning, ends in servitude still painful,
 And mostly profitless. And, sooth to say,
 On nearer view, a motley spectacle
 Appeared, of high pretensions, unreproved
 But by the obstreperous voice of higher still;
 Big passions strutting on a petty stage; 
 Which a detached spectator may regard
 Not unamused. But ridicule demands
 Quick change of objects; and, to laugh alone,
 At a composing distance from the haunts
 Of strife and folly, though it be a treat
 As choice as musing Leisure can bestow;
 Yet, in the very centre of the crowd,
 To keep the secret of a poignant scorn,
 Howe'er to airy Demons suitable,
 Of all unsocial courses, is least fit 
 For the gross spirit of mankind, the one
 That soonest fails to please, and quickliest turns
 Into vexation.
 Let us, then, I said,
 Leave this unknit Republic to the scourge
 Of her own passions; and to regions haste,
 Whose shades have never felt the encroaching axe,
 Or soil endured a transfer in the mart
 Of dire rapacity. There, Man abides,
 Primeval Nature's child. A creature weak
 In combination, (wherefore else driven back 
 So far, and of his old inheritance
 So easily deprived?) but, for that cause,
 More dignified, and stronger in himself;
 Whether to act, judge, suffer, or enjoy.
 True, the intelligence of social art
 Hath overpowered his forefathers, and soon
 Will sweep the remnant of his line away;
 But contemplations, worthier, nobler far
 Than her destructive energies, attend
 His independence, when along the side 
 Of Mississippi, or that northern stream
 That spreads into successive seas, he walks;
 Pleased to perceive his own unshackled life,
 And his innate capacities of soul,
 There imaged: or when, having gained the top
 Of some commanding eminence, which yet
 Intruder ne'er beheld, he thence surveys
 Regions of wood and wide savannah, vast
 Expanse of unappropriated earth,
 With mind that sheds a light on what he sees; 
 Free as the sun, and lonely as the sun,
 Pouring above his head its radiance down
 Upon a living and rejoicing world!

 So, westward, tow'rd the unviolated woods
 I bent my way; and, roaming far and wide,
 Failed not to greet the merry Mocking-bird;
 And, while the melancholy Muccawiss
 (The sportive bird's companion in the grove)
 Repeated, o'er and o'er, his plaintive cry,
 I sympathised at leisure with the sound; 
 But that pure archetype of human greatness,
 I found him not. There, in his stead, appeared
 A creature, squalid, vengeful, and impure;
 Remorseless, and submissive to no law
 But superstitious fear, and abject sloth.

 Enough is told! Here am I ye have heard
 What evidence I seek, and vainly seek;
 What from my fellow-beings I require,
 And either they have not to give, or I
 Lack virtue to receive; what I myself, 
 Too oft by wilful forfeiture, have lost
 Nor can regain. How languidly I look
 Upon this visible fabric of the world,
 May be divined perhaps it hath been said: 
 But spare your pity, if there be in me
 Aught that deserves respect: for I exist,
 Within myself, not comfortless. The tenor
 Which my life holds, he readily may conceive
 Whoe'er hath stood to watch a mountain brook
 In some still passage of its course, and seen, 
 Within the depths of its capacious breast,
 Inverted trees, rocks, clouds, and azure sky;
 And, on its glassy surface, specks of foam,
 And conglobated bubbles undissolved,
 Numerous as stars; that, by their onward lapse,
 Betray to sight the motion of the stream,
 Else imperceptible. Meanwhile, is heard
 A softened roar, or murmur; and the sound
 Though soothing, and the little floating isles
 Though beautiful, are both by Nature charged 
 With the same pensive office; and make known
 Through what perplexing labyrinths, abrupt
 Precipitations, and untoward straits,
 The earth-born wanderer hath passed; and quickly,
 That respite o'er, like traverses and toils
 Must he again encounter. Such a stream
 Is human Life; and so the Spirit fares
 In the best quiet to her course allowed;
 And such is mine, save only for a hope
 That my particular current soon will reach 
 The unfathomable gulf, where all is still!"
