---
author: William Wordsworth 
title: The Excursion - Book First - The Wanderer
---

 'Twas summer, and the sun had mounted high:
 Southward the landscape indistinctly glared
 Through a pale steam; but all the northern downs,
 In clearest air ascending, showed far off
 A surface dappled o'er with shadows flung
 From brooding clouds; shadows that lay in spots
 Determined and unmoved, with steady beams
 Of bright and pleasant sunshine interposed;
 To him most pleasant who on soft cool moss
 Extends his careless limbs along the front
 Of some huge cave, whose rocky ceiling casts
 A twilight of its own, an ample shade,
 Where the wren warbles, while the dreaming man,
 Half conscious of the soothing melody,
 With side-long eye looks out upon the scene,
 By power of that impending covert, thrown
 To finer distance. Mine was at that hour
 Far other lot, yet with good hope that soon
 Under a shade as grateful I should find
 Rest, and be welcomed there to livelier joy.
 Across a bare wide Common I was toiling
 With languid steps that by the slippery turf
 Were baffled; nor could my weak arm disperse
 The host of insects gathering round my face,
 And ever with me as I paced along.

 Upon that open moorland stood a grove,
 The wished-for port to which my course was bound.
 Thither I came, and there, amid the gloom
 Spread by a brotherhood of lofty elms,
 Appeared a roofless Hut; four naked walls
 That stared upon each other!--I looked round,
 And to my wish and to my hope espied
 The Friend I sought; a Man of reverend age,
 But stout and hale, for travel unimpaired.
 There was he seen upon the cottage-bench,
 Recumbent in the shade, as if asleep;
 An iron-pointed staff lay at his side.

 Him had I marked the day before--alone
 And stationed in the public way, with face
 Turned toward the sun then setting, while that staff
 Afforded, to the figure of the man
 Detained for contemplation or repose,
 Graceful support; his countenance as he stood
 Was hidden from my view, and he remained
 Unrecognised; but, stricken by the sight,
 With slackened footsteps I advanced, and soon
 A glad congratulation we exchanged
 At such unthought-of meeting.--For the night
 We parted, nothing willingly; and now
 He by appointment waited for me here,
 Under the covert of these clustering elms.

 We were tried Friends: amid a pleasant vale,
 In the antique market-village where was passed
 My school-time, an apartment he had owned,
 To which at intervals the Wanderer drew,
 And found a kind of home or harbour there.
 He loved me, from a swarm of rosy boys
 Singled out me, as he in sport would say,
 For my grave looks, too thoughtful for my years.
 As I grew up, it was my best delight
 To be his chosen comrade. Many a time,
 On holidays, we rambled through the woods:
 We sate--we walked; he pleased me with report
 Of things which he had seen; and often touched
 Abstrusest matter, reasonings of the mind
 Turned inward; or at my request would sing
 Old songs, the product of his native hills;
 A skilful distribution of sweet sounds,
 Feeding the soul, and eagerly imbibed
 As cool refreshing water, by the care
 Of the industrious husbandman, diffused
 Through a parched meadow-ground, in time of drought.
 Still deeper welcome found his pure discourse;
 How precious, when in riper days I learned
 To weigh with care his words, and to rejoice
 In the plain presence of his dignity!

 Oh! many are the Poets that are sown
 By Nature; men endowed with highest gifts,
 The vision and the faculty divine;
 Yet wanting the accomplishment of verse,
 (Which, in the docile season of their youth,
 It was denied them to acquire, through lack
 Of culture and the inspiring aid of books,
 Or haply by a temper too severe,
 Or a nice backwardness afraid of shame)
 Nor having e'er, as life advanced, been led
 By circumstance to take unto the height
 The measure of themselves, these favoured Beings,
 All but a scattered few, live out their time,
 Husbanding that which they possess within,
 And go to the grave, unthought of. Strongest minds
 Are often those of whom the noisy world
 Hears least; else surely this Man had not left
 His graces unrevealed and unproclaimed.
 But, as the mind was filled with inward light,
 So not without distinction had he lived,
 Beloved and honoured--far as he was known.
 And some small portion of his eloquent speech,
 And something that may serve to set in view
 The feeling pleasures of his loneliness,
 His observations, and the thoughts his mind
 Had dealt with--I will here record in verse;
 Which, if with truth it correspond, and sink
 Or rise as venerable Nature leads,
 The high and tender Muses shall accept
 With gracious smile, deliberately pleased,
 And listening Time reward with sacred praise.

 Among the hills of Athol he was born;
 Where, on a small hereditary farm,
 An unproductive slip of rugged ground,
 His Parents, with their numerous offspring, dwelt;
 A virtuous household, though exceeding poor!
 Pure livers were they all, austere and grave,
 And fearing God; the very children taught
 Stern self-respect, a reverence for God's word,
 And an habitual piety, maintained
 With strictness scarcely known on English ground.

 From his sixth year, the Boy of whom I speak,
 In summer, tended cattle on the hills;
 But, through the inclement and the perilous days
 Of long-continuing winter, he repaired,
 Equipped with satchel, to a school, that stood
 Sole building on a mountain's dreary edge,
 Remote from view of city spire, or sound
 Of minster clock! From that bleak tenement
 He, many an evening, to his distant home
 In solitude returning, saw the hills
 Grow larger in the darkness; all alone
 Beheld the stars come out above his head,
 And travelled through the wood, with no one near
 To whom he might confess the things he saw.

 So the foundations of his mind were laid.
 In such communion, not from terror free,
 While yet a child, and long before his time,
 Had he perceived the presence and the power
 Of greatness; and deep feelings had impressed
 So vividly great objects that they lay
 Upon his mind like substances, whose presence
 Perplexed the bodily sense. He had received
 A precious gift; for, as he grew in years,
 With these impressions would he still compare
 All his remembrances, thoughts, shapes, and forms;
 And, being still unsatisfied with aught
 Of dimmer character, he thence attained
 An active power to fasten images
 Upon his brain; and on their pictured lines
 Intensely brooded, even till they acquired
 The liveliness of dreams. Nor did he fail,
 While yet a child, with a child's eagerness
 Incessantly to turn his ear and eye
 On all things which the moving seasons brought
 To feed such appetite--nor this alone
 Appeased his yearning:--in the after-day
 Of boyhood, many an hour in caves forlorn,
 And 'mid the hollow depths of naked crags
 He sate, and even in their fixed lineaments,
 Or from the power of a peculiar eye,
 Or by creative feeling overborne,
 Or by predominance of thought oppressed,
 Even in their fixed and steady lineaments
 He traced an ebbing and a flowing mind,
 Expression ever varying!
 Thus informed,
 He had small need of books; for many a tale
 Traditionary, round the mountains hung,
 And many a legend, peopling the dark woods,
 Nourished Imagination in her growth,
 And gave the Mind that apprehensive power
 By which she is made quick to recognise
 The moral properties and scope of things.
 But eagerly he read, and read again,
 Whate'er the minister's old shelf supplied;
 The life and death of martyrs, who sustained,
 With will inflexible, those fearful pangs
 Triumphantly displayed in records left
 Of persecution, and the Covenant--times
 Whose echo rings through Scotland to this hour!
 And there, by lucky hap, had been preserved
 A straggling volume, torn and incomplete,
 That left half-told the preternatural tale,
 Romance of giants, chronicle of fiends,
 Profuse in garniture of wooden cuts
 Strange and uncouth; dire faces, figures dire,
 Sharp-kneed, sharp-elbowed, and lean-ankled too,
 With long and ghostly shanks--forms which once seen
 Could never be forgotten!
 In his heart,
 Where Fear sate thus, a cherished visitant,
 Was wanting yet the pure delight of love
 By sound diffused, or by the breathing air,
 Or by the silent looks of happy things,
 Or flowing from the universal face
 Of earth and sky. But he had felt the power
 Of Nature, and already was prepared,
 By his intense conceptions, to receive
 Deeply the lesson deep of love which he,
 Whom Nature, by whatever means, has taught
 To feel intensely, cannot but receive.

 Such was the Boy--but for the growing Youth
 What soul was his, when, from the naked top
 Of some bold headland, he beheld the sun
 Rise up, and bathe the world in light! He looked--
 Ocean and earth, the solid frame of earth
 And ocean's liquid mass, in gladness lay
 Beneath him:--Far and wide the clouds were touched,
 And in their silent faces could he read
 Unutterable love. Sound needed none,
 Nor any voice of joy; his spirit drank
 The spectacle: sensation, soul, and form,
 All melted into him; they swallowed up
 His animal being; in them did he live,
 And by them did he live; they were his life.
 In such access of mind, in such high hour
 Of visitation from the living God,
 Thought was not; in enjoyment it expired.
 No thanks he breathed, he proffered no request;
 Rapt into still communion that transcends
 The imperfect offices of prayer and praise,
 His mind was a thanksgiving to the power
 That made him; it was blessedness and love!

 A Herdsman on the lonely mountain tops,
 Such intercourse was his, and in this sort
 Was his existence oftentimes 'possessed'.
 O then how beautiful, how bright, appeared
 The written promise! Early had he learned
 To reverence the volume that displays
 The mystery, the life which cannot die;
 But in the mountains did he 'feel' his faith.
 All things, responsive to the writing, there
 Breathed immortality, revolving life,
 And greatness still revolving; infinite:
 There littleness was not; the least of things
 Seemed infinite; and there his spirit shaped
 Her prospects, nor did he believe,--he 'saw'.
 What wonder if his being thus became
 Sublime and comprehensive! Low desires,
 Low thoughts had there no place; yet was his heart
 Lowly; for he was meek in gratitude,
 Oft as he called those ecstasies to mind,
 And whence they flowed; and from them he acquired
 Wisdom, which works through patience; thence he learned
 In oft-recurring hours of sober thought
 To look on Nature with a humble heart.
 Self-questioned where it did not understand,
 And with a superstitious eye of love.

 So passed the time; yet to the nearest town
 He duly went with what small overplus
 His earnings might supply, and brought away
 The book that most had tempted his desires
 While at the stall he read. Among the hills
 He gazed upon that mighty orb of song,
 The divine Milton. Lore of different kind,
 The annual savings of a toilsome life,
 His Schoolmaster supplied; books that explain
 The purer elements of truth involved
 In lines and numbers, and, by charm severe,
 (Especially perceived where nature droops
 And feeling is suppressed) preserve the mind
 Busy in solitude and poverty.
 These occupations oftentimes deceived
 The listless hours, while in the hollow vale,
 Hollow and green, he lay on the green turf
 In pensive idleness. What could he do,
 Thus daily thirsting, in that lonesome life,
 With blind endeavours? Yet, still uppermost,
 Nature was at his heart as if he felt,
 Though yet he knew not how, a wasting power
 In all things that from her sweet influence
 Might tend to wean him. Therefore with her hues,
 Her forms, and with the spirit of her forms,
 He clothed the nakedness of austere truth.
 While yet he lingered in the rudiments
 Of science, and among her simplest laws,
 His triangles--they were the stars of heaven,
 The silent stars! Oft did he take delight
 To measure the altitude of some tall crag
 That is the eagle's birth-place, or some peak
 Familiar with forgotten years, that shows,
 Inscribed upon its visionary sides,
 The history of many a winter storm,
 Or obscure records of the path of fire.

 And thus before his eighteenth year was told,
 Accumulated feelings pressed his heart
 With still increasing weight; he was o'er-powered
 By Nature; by the turbulence subdued
 Of his own mind; by mystery and hope,
 And the first virgin passion of a soul
 Communing with the glorious universe.
 Full often wished he that the winds might rage
 When they were silent: far more fondly now
 Than in his earlier season did he love
 Tempestuous nights--the conflict and the sounds
 That live in darkness. From his intellect
 And from the stillness of abstracted thought
 He asked repose; and, failing oft to win
 The peace required, he scanned the laws of light
 Amid the roar of torrents, where they send
 From hollow clefts up to the clearer air
 A cloud of mist that, smitten by the sun,
 Varies its rainbow hues. But vainly thus,
 And vainly by all other means, he strove
 To mitigate the fever of his heart.

 In dreams, in study, and in ardent thought,
 Thus was he reared; much wanting to assist
 The growth of intellect, yet gaining more,
 And every moral feeling of his soul
 Strengthened and braced, by breathing in content
 The keen, the wholesome, air of poverty,
 And drinking from the well of homely life.
 --But, from past liberty, and tried restraints,
 He now was summoned to select the course
 Of humble industry that promised best
 To yield him no unworthy maintenance.
 Urged by his Mother, he essayed to teach
 A village-school--but wandering thoughts were then
 A misery to him; and the Youth resigned
 A task he was unable to perform.

 That stern yet kindly Spirit, who constrains
 The Savoyard to quit his naked rocks,
 The free-born Swiss to leave his narrow vales,
 (Spirit attached to regions mountainous
 Like their own stedfast clouds) did now impel
 His restless mind to look abroad with hope.
 --An irksome drudgery seems it to plod on,
 Through hot and dusty ways, or pelting storm,
 A vagrant Merchant under a heavy load,
 Bent as he moves, and needing frequent rest;
 Yet do such travellers find their own delight;
 And their hard service, deemed debasing now
 Gained merited respect in simpler times;
 When squire, and priest, and they who round them dwelt
 In rustic sequestration--all dependent
 Upon the PEDLAR'S toil--supplied their wants,
 Or pleased their fancies, with the wares he brought.
 Not ignorant was the Youth that still no few
 Of his adventurous countrymen were led
 By perseverance in this track of life
 To competence and ease:--to him it offered
 Attractions manifold;--and this he chose.
 --His Parents on the enterprise bestowed
 Their farewell benediction, but with hearts
 Foreboding evil. From his native hills
 He wandered far; much did he see of men,
 Their manners, their enjoyments, and pursuits,
 Their passions and their feelings; chiefly those
 Essential and eternal in the heart,
 That, 'mid the simpler forms of rural life,
 Exist more simple in their elements,
 And speak a plainer language. In the woods,
 A lone Enthusiast, and among the fields,
 Itinerant in this labour, he had passed
 The better portion of his time; and there
 Spontaneously had his affections thriven
 Amid the bounties of the year, the peace
 And liberty of nature; there he kept
 In solitude and solitary thought
 His mind in a just equipoise of love.
 Serene it was, unclouded by the cares
 Of ordinary life; unvexed, unwarped
 By partial bondage. In his steady course,
 No piteous revolutions had he felt,
 No wild varieties of joy and grief.
 Unoccupied by sorrow of its own,
 His heart lay open; and, by nature tuned
 And constant disposition of his thoughts
 To sympathy with man, he was alive
 To all that was enjoyed where'er he went,
 And all that was endured; for, in himself
 Happy, and quiet in his cheerfulness,
 He had no painful pressure from without
 That made him turn aside from wretchedness
 With coward fears. He could 'afford' to suffer
 With those whom he saw suffer. Hence it came
 That in our best experience he was rich,
 And in the wisdom of our daily life.
 For hence, minutely, in his various rounds,
 He had observed the progress and decay
 Of many minds, of minds and bodies too;
 The history of many families;
 How they had prospered; how they were o'erthrown
 By passion or mischance, or such misrule
 Among the unthinking masters of the earth
 As makes the nations groan.
 This active course
 He followed till provision for his wants
 Had been obtained;--the Wanderer then resolved
 To pass the remnant of his days, untasked
 With needless services, from hardship free.
 His calling laid aside, he lived at ease:
 But still he loved to pace the public roads
 And the wild paths; and, by the summer's warmth
 Invited, often would he leave his home
 And journey far, revisiting the scenes
 That to his memory were most endeared.
 --Vigorous in health, of hopeful spirits, undamped
 By worldly-mindedness or anxious care;
 Observant, studious, thoughtful, and refreshed
 By knowledge gathered up from day to day;
 Thus had he lived a long and innocent life.

 The Scottish Church, both on himself and those
 With whom from childhood he grew up, had held
 The strong hand of her purity; and still
 Had watched him with an unrelenting eye.
 This he remembered in his riper age
 With gratitude, and reverential thoughts.
 But by the native vigour of his mind,
 By his habitual wanderings out of doors,
 By loneliness, and goodness, and kind works,
 Whate'er, in docile childhood or in youth,
 He had imbibed of fear or darker thought
 Was melted all away; so true was this,
 That sometimes his religion seemed to me
 Self-taught, as of a dreamer in the woods;
 Who to the model of his own pure heart
 Shaped his belief, as grace divine inspired,
 And human reason dictated with awe.
 --And surely never did there live on earth
 A man of kindlier nature. The rough sports
 And teasing ways of children vexed not him;
 Indulgent listener was he to the tongue
 Of garrulous age; nor did the sick man's tale,
 To his fraternal sympathy addressed,
 Obtain reluctant hearing.
 Plain his garb;
 Such as might suit a rustic Sire, prepared
 For sabbath duties; yet he was a man
 Whom no one could have passed without remark.
 Active and nervous was his gait; his limbs
 And his whole figure breathed intelligence.
 Time had compressed the freshness of his cheek
 Into a narrower circle of deep red,
 But had not tamed his eye; that, under brows
 Shaggy and grey, had meanings which it brought
 From years of youth; which, like a Being made
 Of many Beings, he had wondrous skill
 To blend with knowledge of the years to come,
 Human, or such as lie beyond the grave.
 _____________

 So was He framed; and such his course of life
 Who now, with no appendage but a staff,
 The prized memorial of relinquished toils,
 Upon that cottage-bench reposed his limbs,
 Screened from the sun. Supine the Wanderer lay,
 His eyes as if in drowsiness half shut,
 The shadows of the breezy elms above
 Dappling his face. He had not heard the sound
 Of my approaching steps, and in the shade
 Unnoticed did I stand some minutes' space.
 At length I hailed him, seeing that his hat
 Was moist with water-drops, as if the brim
 Had newly scooped a running stream. He rose,
 And ere our lively greeting into peace
 Had settled, "'Tis," said I, "a burning day:
 My lips are parched with thirst, but you, it seems
 Have somewhere found relief." He, at the word,
 Pointing towards a sweet-briar, bade me climb
 The fence where that aspiring shrub looked out
 Upon the public way. It was a plot
 Of garden ground run wild, its matted weeds
 Marked with the steps of those, whom, as they passed,
 The gooseberry trees that shot in long lank slips,
 Or currants, hanging from their leafless stems,
 In scanty strings, had tempted to o'erleap
 The broken wall. I looked around, and there,
 Where two tall hedge-rows of thick alder boughs
 Joined in a cold damp nook, espied a well
 Shrouded with willow-flowers and plumy fern.
 My thirst I slaked, and, from the cheerless spot
 Withdrawing, straightway to the shade returned
 Where sate the old Man on the cottage-bench;
 And, while, beside him, with uncovered head,
 I yet was standing, freely to respire,
 And cool my temples in the fanning air,
 Thus did he speak. "I see around me here
 Things which you cannot see: we die, my Friend,
 Nor we alone, but that which each man loved
 And prized in his peculiar nook of earth
 Dies with him, or is changed; and very soon
 Even of the good is no memorial left.
 --The Poets, in their elegies and songs
 Lamenting the departed, call the groves,
 They call upon the hills and streams, to mourn,
 And senseless rocks; nor idly; for they speak,
 In these their invocations, with a voice
 Obedient to the strong creative power
 Of human passion. Sympathies there are
 More tranquil, yet perhaps of kindred birth,
 That steal upon the meditative mind,
 And grow with thought. Beside yon spring I stood,
 And eyed its waters till we seemed to feel
 One sadness, they and I. For them a bond
 Of brotherhood is broken: time has been
 When, every day, the touch of human hand
 Dislodged the natural sleep that binds them up
 In mortal stillness; and they ministered
 To human comfort. Stooping down to drink,
 Upon the slimy foot-stone I espied
 The useless fragment of a wooden bowl,
 Green with the moss of years, and subject only
 To the soft handling of the elements:
 There let it lie--how foolish are such thoughts!
 Forgive them;--never--never did my steps
 Approach this door but she who dwelt within
 A daughter's welcome gave me, and I loved her
 As my own child. Oh, Sir! the good die first,
 And they whose hearts are dry as summer dust
 Burn to the socket. Many a passenger
 Hath blessed poor Margaret for her gentle looks,
 When she upheld the cool refreshment drawn
 From that forsaken spring; and no one came
 But he was welcome; no one went away
 But that it seemed she loved him. She is dead,
 The light extinguished of her lonely hut,
 The hut itself abandoned to decay,
 And she forgotten in the quiet grave.

 I speak," continued he, "of One whose stock
 Of virtues bloomed beneath this lonely roof.
 She was a Woman of a steady mind,
 Tender and deep in her excess of love;
 Not speaking much, pleased rather with the joy
 Of her own thoughts: by some especial care
 Her temper had been framed, as if to make
 A Being, who by adding love to peace
 Might live on earth a life of happiness.
 Her wedded Partner lacked not on his side
 The humble worth that satisfied her heart:
 Frugal, affectionate, sober, and withal
 Keenly industrious. She with pride would tell
 That he was often seated at his loom,
 In summer, ere the mower was abroad
 Among the dewy grass,--in early spring,
 Ere the last star had vanished.--They who passed
 At evening, from behind the garden fence
 Might hear his busy spade, which he would ply,
 After his daily work, until the light
 Had failed, and every leaf and flower were lost
 In the dark hedges. So their days were spent
 In peace and comfort; and a pretty boy
 Was their best hope, next to the God in heaven.

 Not twenty years ago, but you I think
 Can scarcely bear it now in mind, there came
 Two blighting seasons, when the fields were left
 With half a harvest. It pleased Heaven to add
 A worse affliction in the plague of war:
 This happy Land was stricken to the heart!
 A Wanderer then among the cottages,
 I, with my freight of winter raiment, saw
 The hardships of that season: many rich
 Sank down, as in a dream, among the poor;
 And of the poor did many cease to be,
 And their place knew them not. Meanwhile, abridged
 Of daily comforts, gladly reconciled
 To numerous self-denials, Margaret
 Went struggling on through those calamitous years
 With cheerful hope, until the second autumn,
 When her life's Helpmate on a sick-bed lay,
 Smitten with perilous fever. In disease
 He lingered long; and, when his strength returned,
 He found the little he had stored, to meet
 The hour of accident or crippling age,
 Was all consumed. A second infant now
 Was added to the troubles of a time
 Laden, for them and all of their degree,
 With care and sorrow; shoals of artisans
 From ill-requited labour turned adrift
 Sought daily bread from public charity,
 They, and their wives and children--happier far
 Could they have lived as do the little birds
 That peck along the hedge-rows, or the kite
 That makes her dwelling on the mountain rocks!

 A sad reverse it was for him who long
 Had filled with plenty, and possessed in peace,
 This lonely Cottage. At the door he stood,
 And whistled many a snatch of merry tunes
 That had no mirth in them; or with his knife
 Carved uncouth figures on the heads of sticks--
 Then, not less idly, sought, through every nook
 In house or garden, any casual work
 Of use or ornament; and with a strange,
 Amusing, yet uneasy, novelty,
 He mingled, where he might, the various tasks
 Of summer, autumn, winter, and of spring.
 But this endured not; his good humour soon
 Became a weight in which no pleasure was:
 And poverty brought on a petted mood
 And a sore temper: day by day he drooped,
 And he would leave his work--and to the town
 Would turn without an errand his slack steps;
 Or wander here and there among the fields.
 One while he would speak lightly of his babes,
 And with a cruel tongue: at other times
 He tossed them with a false unnatural joy:
 And 'twas a rueful thing to see the looks
 Of the poor innocent children. 'Every smile,'
 Said Margaret to me, here beneath these trees,
 'Made my heart bleed.'"
 At this the Wanderer paused;
 And, looking up to those enormous elms,
 He said, "'Tis now the hour of deepest noon.
 At this still season of repose and peace,
 This hour when all things which are not at rest
 Are cheerful; while this multitude of flies
 With tuneful hum is filling all the air;
 Why should a tear be on an old Man's cheek?
 Why should we thus, with an untoward mind,
 And in the weakness of humanity,
 From natural wisdom turn our hearts away;
 To natural comfort shut our eyes and ears;
 And, feeding on disquiet, thus disturb
 The calm of nature with our restless thoughts?"
 _____________

 HE spake with somewhat of a solemn tone:
 But, when he ended, there was in his face
 Such easy cheerfulness, a look so mild,
 That for a little time it stole away
 All recollection; and that simple tale
 Passed from my mind like a forgotten sound.
 A while on trivial things we held discourse,
 To me soon tasteless. In my own despite,
 I thought of that poor Woman as of one
 Whom I had known and loved. He had rehearsed
 Her homely tale with such familiar power,
 With such an active countenance, an eye
 So busy, that the things of which he spake
 Seemed present; and, attention now relaxed,
 A heart-felt chillness crept along my veins.
 I rose; and, having left the breezy shade,
 Stood drinking comfort from the warmer sun,
 That had not cheered me long--ere, looking round
 Upon that tranquil Ruin, I returned,
 And begged of the old Man that, for my sake,
 He would resume his story.

 He replied,
 "It were a wantonness, and would demand
 Severe reproof, if we were men whose hearts
 Could hold vain dalliance with the misery
 Even of the dead; contented thence to draw
 A momentary pleasure, never marked
 By reason, barren of all future good.
 But we have known that there is often found
 In mournful thoughts, and always might be found,
 A power to virtue friendly; were't not so,
 I am a dreamer among men, indeed
 An idle dreamer! 'Tis a common tale,
 An ordinary sorrow of man's life,
 A tale of silent suffering, hardly clothed
 In bodily form.--But without further bidding
 I will proceed.
 While thus it fared with them,
 To whom this cottage, till those hapless years,
 Had been a blessed home, it was my chance
 To travel in a country far remote;
 And when these lofty elms once more appeared
 What pleasant expectations lured me on
 O'er the flat Common!--With quick step I reached
 The threshold, lifted with light hand the latch;
 But, when I entered, Margaret looked at me
 A little while; then turned her head away
 Speechless,--and, sitting down upon a chair,
 Wept bitterly. I wist not what to do,
 Nor how to speak to her. Poor Wretch! at last
 She rose from off her seat, and then,--O Sir!
 I cannot 'tell' how she pronounced my name:--
 With fervent love, and with a face of grief
 Unutterably helpless, and a look
 That seemed to cling upon me, she enquired
 If I had seen her husband. As she spake
 A strange surprise and fear came to my heart,
 Nor had I power to answer ere she told
 That he had disappeared--not two months gone.
 He left his house: two wretched days had past,
 And on the third, as wistfully she raised
 Her head from off her pillow, to look forth,
 Like one in trouble, for returning light,
 Within her chamber-casement she espied
 A folded paper, lying as if placed
 To meet her waking eyes. This tremblingly
 She opened--found no writing, but beheld
 Pieces of money carefully enclosed,
 Silver and gold. 'I shuddered at the sight,'
 Said Margaret, 'for I knew it was his hand
 That must have placed it there; and ere that day
 Was ended, that long anxious day, I learned,
 From one who by my husband had been sent
 With the sad news, that he had joined a troop
 Of soldiers, going to a distant land.
 --He left me thus--he could not gather heart
 To take a farewell of me; for he feared
 That I should follow with my babes, and sink
 Beneath the misery of that wandering life.'

 This tale did Margaret tell with many tears:
 And, when she ended, I had little power
 To give her comfort, and was glad to take
 Such words of hope from her own mouth as served
 To cheer us both. But long we had not talked
 Ere we built up a pile of better thoughts,
 And with a brighter eye she looked around
 As if she had been shedding tears of joy.
 We parted.--'Twas the time of early spring;
 I left her busy with her garden tools;
 And well remember, o'er that fence she looked,
 And, while I paced along the foot-way path,
 Called out, and sent a blessing after me,
 With tender cheerfulness, and with a voice
 That seemed the very sound of happy thoughts.

 I roved o'er many a hill and many a dale,
 With my accustomed load; in heat and cold,
 Through many a wood and many an open ground,
 In sunshine and in shade, in wet and fair,
 Drooping or blithe of heart, as might befall;
 My best companions now the driving winds,
 And now the 'trotting brooks' and whispering trees,
 And now the music of my own sad steps,
 With many a short-lived thought that passed between,
 And disappeared.
 I journeyed back this way,
 When, in the warmth of midsummer, the wheat
 Was yellow; and the soft and bladed grass,
 Springing afresh, had o'er the hay-field spread
 Its tender verdure. At the door arrived,
 I found that she was absent. In the shade,
 Where now we sit, I waited her return.
 Her cottage, then a cheerful object, wore
 Its customary look,--only, it seemed,
 The honeysuckle, crowding round the porch,
 Hung down in heavier tufts; and that bright weed,
 The yellow stone-crop, suffered to take root
 Along the window's edge, profusely grew,
 Blinding the lower panes. I turned aside,
 And strolled into her garden. It appeared
 To lag behind the season, and had lost
 Its pride of neatness. Daisy-flowers and thrift
 Had broken their trim border-lines, and straggled
 O'er paths they used to deck: carnations, once
 Prized for surpassing beauty, and no less
 For the peculiar pains they had required,
 Declined their languid heads, wanting support.
 The cumbrous bind-weed, with its wreaths and bells,
 Had twined about her two small rows of peas,
 And dragged them to the earth.
 Ere this an hour
 Was wasted.--Back I turned my restless steps;
 A stranger passed; and, guessing whom I sought,
 He said that she was used to ramble far.--
 The sun was sinking in the west; and now
 I sate with sad impatience. From within
 Her solitary infant cried aloud;
 Then, like a blast that dies away self-stilled,
 The voice was silent. From the bench I rose;
 But neither could divert nor soothe my thoughts.
 The spot, though fair, was very desolate--
 The longer I remained, more desolate:
 And, looking round me, now I first observed
 The corner stones, on either side the porch,
 With dull red stains discoloured, and stuck o'er
 With tufts and hairs of wool, as if the sheep,
 That fed upon the Common, thither came
 Familiarly, and found a couching-place
 Even at her threshold. Deeper shadows fell
 From these tall elms; the cottage-clock struck eight;--
 I turned, and saw her distant a few steps.
 Her face was pale and thin--her figure, too,
 Was changed. As she unlocked the door, she said,
 'It grieves me you have waited here so long,
 But, in good truth, I've wandered much of late;
 And sometimes--to my shame I speak--have need
 Of my best prayers to bring me back again.
 While on the board she spread our evening meal,
 She told me--interrupting not the work
 Which gave employment to her listless hands--
 That she had parted with her elder child;
 To a kind master on a distant farm
 Now happily apprenticed.--'I perceive
 You look at me, and you have cause; today
 I have been travelling far; and many days
 About the fields I wander, knowing this
 Only, that what I seek I cannot find;
 And so I waste my time: for I am changed;
 And to myself,' said she, 'have done much wrong
 And to this helpless infant. I have slept
 Weeping, and weeping have I waked; my tears
 Have flowed as if my body were not such
 As others are; and I could never die.
 But I am now in mind and in my heart
 More easy; and I hope,' said she, 'that God
 Will give me patience to endure the things
 Which I behold at home.'
 It would have grieved
 Your very soul to see her. Sir, I feel
 The story linger in my heart; I fear
 'Tis long and tedious; but my spirit clings
 To that poor Woman:--so familiarly
 Do I perceive her manner, and her look,
 And presence; and so deeply do I feel
 Her goodness, that, not seldom, in my walks
 A momentary trance comes over me;
 And to myself I seem to muse on One
 By sorrow laid asleep; or borne away,
 A human being destined to awake
 To human life, or something very near
 To human life, when he shall come again
 For whom she suffered. Yes, it would have grieved
 Your very soul to see her: evermore
 Her eyelids drooped, her eyes downward were cast;
 And, when she at her table gave me food,
 She did not look at me. Her voice was low,
 Her body was subdued. In every act
 Pertaining to her house-affairs, appeared
 The careless stillness of a thinking mind
 Self-occupied; to which all outward things
 Are like an idle matter. Still she sighed,
 But yet no motion of the breast was seen,
 No heaving of the heart. While by the fire
 We sate together, sighs came on my ear,
 I knew not how, and hardly whence they came.

 Ere my departure, to her care I gave,
 For her son's use, some tokens of regard,
 Which with a look of welcome she received;
 And I exhorted her to place her trust
 In God's good love, and seek his help by prayer.
 I took my staff, and, when I kissed her babe,
 The tears stood in her eyes. I left her then
 With the best hope and comfort I could give:
 She thanked me for my wish;--but for my hope
 It seemed she did not thank me.
 I returned,
 And took my rounds along this road again
 When on its sunny bank the primrose flower
 Peeped forth, to give an earnest of the Spring.
 I found her sad and drooping: she had learned
 No tidings of her husband; if he lived,
 She knew not that he lived; if he were dead,
 She knew not he was dead. She seemed the same
 In person and appearance; but her house
 Bespake a sleepy hand of negligence;
 The floor was neither dry nor neat, the hearth
 Was comfortless, and her small lot of books,
 Which, in the cottage-window, heretofore
 Had been piled up against the corner panes
 In seemly order, now, with straggling leaves
 Lay scattered here and there, open or shut,
 As they had chanced to fall. Her infant Babe
 Had from his Mother caught the trick of grief,
 And sighed among its playthings. I withdrew,
 And once again entering the garden saw,
 More plainly still, that poverty and grief
 Were now come nearer to her: weeds defaced
 The hardened soil, and knots of withered grass:
 No ridges there appeared of clear black mould,
 No winter greenness; of her herbs and flowers,
 It seemed the better part was gnawed away
 Or trampled into earth; a chain of straw,
 Which had been twined about the slender stem
 Of a young apple-tree, lay at its root;
 The bark was nibbled round by truant sheep.
 --Margaret stood near, her infant in her arms,
 And, noting that my eye was on the tree,
 She said, 'I fear it will be dead and gone

 Ere Robert come again.' When to the House
 We had returned together, she enquired
 If I had any hope:--but for her babe
 And for her little orphan boy, she said,
 She had no wish to live, that she must die
 Of sorrow. Yet I saw the idle loom
 Still in its place; his Sunday garments hung
 Upon the self-same nail; his very staff
 Stood undisturbed behind the door.
 And when,
 In bleak December, I retraced this way,
 She told me that her little babe was dead,
 And she was left alone. She now, released
 From her maternal cares, had taken up
 The employment common through these wilds, and gained,
 By spinning hemp, a pittance for herself;
 And for this end had hired a neighbour's boy
 To give her needful help. That very time
 Most willingly she put her work aside,
 And walked with me along the miry road,
 Heedless how far; and, in such piteous sort
 That any heart had ached to hear her, begged
 That, wheresoe'er I went, I still would ask
 For him whom she had lost. We parted then--
 Our final parting; for from that time forth
 Did many seasons pass ere I returned
 Into this tract again.
 Nine tedious years;
 From their first separation, nine long years,
 She lingered in unquiet widowhood;
 A Wife and Widow. Needs must it have been
 A sore heart-wasting! I have heard, my Friend,
 That in yon arbour oftentimes she sate
 Alone, through half the vacant sabbath day;
 And, if a dog passed by, she still would quit
 The shade, and look abroad. On this old bench
 For hours she sate; and evermore her eye
 Was busy in the distance, shaping things
 That made her heart beat quick. You see that path,
 Now faint,--the grass has crept o'er its grey line;
 There, to and fro, she paced through many a day
 Of the warm summer, from a belt of hemp
 That girt her waist, spinning the long-drawn thread
 With backward steps. Yet ever as there passed
 A man whose garments showed the soldier's red,
 Or crippled mendicant in sailor's garb,
 The little child who sate to turn the wheel
 Ceased from his task; and she with faltering voice
 Made many a fond enquiry; and when they,
 Whose presence gave no comfort, were gone by,
 Her heart was still more sad. And by yon gate,
 That bars the traveller's road, she often stood,
 And when a stranger horseman came, the latch
 Would lift, and in his face look wistfully;
 Most happy, if, from aught discovered there
 Of tender feeling, she might dare repeat
 The same sad question. Meanwhile her poor Hut
 Sank to decay; for he was gone, whose hand,
 At the first nipping of October frost,
 Closed up each chink, and with fresh bands of straw
 Chequered the green-grown thatch. And so she lived
 Through the long winter, reckless and alone;
 Until her house by frost, and thaw, and rain,
 Was sapped; and while she slept, the nightly damps
 Did chill her breast; and in the stormy day
 Her tattered clothes were ruffled by the wind,
 Even at the side of her own fire. Yet still
 She loved this wretched spot, nor would for worlds
 Have parted hence; and still that length of road,
 And this rude bench, one torturing hope endeared,
 Fast rooted at her heart: and here, my Friend,--
 In sickness she remained; and here she died;
 Last human tenant of these ruined walls!"

 The old Man ceased: he saw that I was moved;
 From that low bench, rising instinctively
 I turned aside in weakness, nor had power
 To thank him for the tale which he had told.
 I stood, and leaning o'er the garden wall
 Reviewed that Woman's sufferings; and it seemed
 To comfort me while with a brother's love
 I blessed her in the impotence of grief.
 Then towards the cottage I returned; and traced
 Fondly, though with an interest more mild,
 That secret spirit of humanity
 Which, 'mid the calm oblivious tendencies
 Of nature, 'mid her plants, and weeds, and flowers,
 And silent overgrowings, still survived.
 The old Man, noting this, resumed, and said,
 "My Friend! enough to sorrow you have given,
 The purposes of wisdom ask no more:
 Nor more would she have craved as due to One
 Who, in her worst distress, had ofttimes felt
 The unbounded might of prayer; and learned, with soul
 Fixed on the Cross, that consolation springs,
 From sources deeper far than deepest pain,
 For the meek Sufferer. Why then should we read
 The forms of things with an unworthy eye?
 She sleeps in the calm earth, and peace is here.
 I well remember that those very plumes,
 Those weeds, and the high spear-grass on that wall,
 By mist and silent rain-drops silvered o'er,
 As once I passed, into my heart conveyed
 So still an image of tranquillity,
 So calm and still, and looked so beautiful
 Amid the uneasy thoughts which filled my mind,
 That what we feel of sorrow and despair
 From ruin and from change, and all the grief
 That passing shows of Being leave behind,
 Appeared an idle dream, that could maintain,
 Nowhere, dominion o'er the enlightened spirit
 Whose meditative sympathies repose
 Upon the breast of Faith. I turned away,
 And walked along my road in happiness."

 He ceased. Ere long the sun declining shot
 A slant and mellow radiance, which began
 To fall upon us, while, beneath the trees,
 We sate on that low bench: and now we felt,
 Admonished thus, the sweet hour coming on.
 A linnet warbled from those lofty elms,
 A thrush sang loud, and other melodies,
 At distance heard, peopled the milder air.
 The old Man rose, and, with a sprightly mien
 Of hopeful preparation, grasped his staff;
 Together casting then a farewell look
 Upon those silent walls, we left the shade;
 And, ere the stars were visible, had reached
 A village-inn,--our evening resting-place.
