---
author: William Wordsworth 
title: Memorials Of A Tour On The Continent, 1820 - XXXI. - Processions - Suggested On A Sabbath Morning In The Vale Of Chamouny
---

 To appease the Gods; or public thanks to yield;
 Or to solicit knowledge of events,
 Which in her breast Futurity concealed;
 And that the past might have its true intents
 Feelingly told by living monuments
 Mankind of yore were prompted to devise
 Rites such as yet Persepolis presents
 Graven on her cankered walls, solemnities
 That moved in long array before admiring eyes.

 The Hebrews thus, carrying in joyful state
 Thick boughs of palm, and willows from the brook,
 Marched round the altar to commemorate
 How, when their course they through the desert took,
 Guided by signs which ne'er the sky forsook,
 They lodged in leafy tents and cabins low;
 Green boughs were borne, while, for the blast that shook
 Down to the earth the walls of Jericho,
 Shouts rise, and storms of sound from lifted trumpets blow!

 And thus, in order, 'mid the sacred grove
 Fed in the Libyan waste by gushing wells,
 The priests and damsels of Ammonian Jove
 Provoked responses with shrill canticles;
 While, in a ship begirt with silver bells,
 They round his altar bore the horned God,
 Old Cham, the solar Deity, who dwells
 Aloft, yet in a tilting vessel rode,
 When universal sea the mountains overflowed.

 Why speak of Roman Pomps? the haughty claims
 Of Chiefs triumphant after ruthless wars;
 The feast of Neptune and the Cereal Games,
 With images, and crowns, and empty cars;
 The dancing Salii, on the shields of Mars
 Smiting with fury; and a deeper dread
 Scattered on all sides by the hideous jars
 Of Corybantian cymbals, while the head
 Of Cybele was seen, sublimely turreted!

 At length a Spirit more subdued and soft
 Appeared to govern Christian pageantries:
 The Cross, in calm procession, borne aloft
 Moved to the chant of sober litanies.
 Even such, this day, came wafted on the breeze
 From a long train, in hooded vestments fair
 Enwrapt and winding, between Alpine trees
 Spiry and dark, around their House of prayer,
 Below the icy bed of bright Argentiere.

 Still in the vivid freshness of a dream,
 The pageant haunts me as it met our eyes!
 Still, with those white-robed Shapes, a living Stream,
 The glacier Pillars join in solemn guise
 For the same service, by mysterious ties;
 Numbers exceeding credible account
 Of number, pure and silent Votaries
 Issuing or issued from a wintry fount;
 The impenetrable heart of that exalted Mount!

 They, too, who send so far a holy gleam
 While they the Church engird with motion slow,
 A product of that awful Mountain seem,
 Poured from his vaults of everlasting snow;
 Not virgin lilies marshaled in bright row,
 Not swans descending with the stealthy tide,
 A livelier sisterly resemblance show
 Than the fair Forms, that in long order glide,
 Bear to the glacier band, those Shapes aloft descried.
 Trembling, I look upon the secret springs
 Of that licentious craving in the mind
 To act the God among external things,
 To bind, on apt suggestion, or unbind;
 And marvel not that antique Faith inclined
 To crowd the world with metamorphosis,
 Vouchsafed in pity or in wrath assigned;
 Such insolent temptations wouldst thou miss,
 Avoid these sights; nor brood o'er Fable's dark abyss!
