---
author: William Wordsworth 
title: The Excursion - Book Eighth - The Parsonage
---

 The pensive Sceptic of the lonely vale
 To those acknowledgments subscribed his own,
 With a sedate compliance, which the Priest
 Failed not to notice, inly pleased, and said:
 "If ye, by whom invited I began
 These narratives of calm and humble life,
 Be satisfied, 'tis well, the end is gained;
 And, in return for sympathy bestowed
 And patient listening, thanks accept from me.
 Life, death, eternity! momentous themes
 Are they and might demand a seraph's tongue,
 Were they not equal to their own support;
 And therefore no incompetence of mine
 Could do them wrong. The universal forms
 Of human nature, in a spot like this,
 Present themselves at once to all men's view:
 Ye wished for act and circumstance, that make
 The individual known and understood;
 And such as my best judgment could select
 From what the place afforded, have been given;
 Though apprehensions crossed me that my zeal
 To his might well be likened, who unlocks
 A cabinet stored with gems and pictures draws
 His treasures forth, soliciting regard
 To this, and this, as worthier than the last,
 Till the spectator, who awhile was pleased
 More than the exhibitor himself, becomes
 Weary and faint, and longs to be released.
 But let us hence! my dwelling is in sight,
 And there "
 At this the Solitary shrunk
 With backward will; but, wanting not address
 That inward motion to disguise, he said
 To his Compatriot, smiling as he spake;
 "The peaceable remains of this good Knight
 Would be disturbed, I fear, with wrathful scorn,
 If consciousness could reach him where he lies
 That one, albeit of these degenerate times,
 Deploring changes past, or dreading change
 Foreseen, had dared to couple, even in thought,
 The fine vocation of the sword and lance
 With the gross aims and body-bending toil
 Of a poor brotherhood who walk the earth
 Pitied, and, where they are not known, despised.

 Yet, by the good Knight's leave, the two estates
 Are graced with some resemblance. Errant those,
 Exiles and wanderers and the like are these;
 Who, with their burthen, traverse hill and dale,
 Carrying relief for nature's simple wants.
 What though no higher recompense be sought
 Than honest maintenance, by irksome toil
 Full oft procured, yet may they claim respect,
 Among the intelligent, for what this course
 Enables them to be and to perform.
 Their tardy steps give leisure to observe,
 While solitude permits the mind to feel;
 Instructs, and prompts her to supply defects
 By the division of her inward self
 For grateful converse: and to these poor men
 Nature (I but repeat your favourite boast)
 Is bountiful go wheresoe'er they may;
 Kind nature's various wealth is all their own.
 Versed in the characters of men; and bound,
 By ties of daily interest, to maintain
 Conciliatory manners and smooth speech;
 Such have been, and still are in their degree,
 Examples efficacious to refine
 Rude intercourse; apt agents to expel,
 By importation of unlooked-for arts,
 Barbarian torpor, and blind prejudice;
 Raising, through just gradation, savage life
 To rustic, and the rustic to urbane.
 Within their moving magazines is lodged
 Power that comes forth to quicken and exalt
 Affections seated in the mother's breast,
 And in the lover's fancy; and to feed
 The sober sympathies of long-tried friends.
 By these Itinerants, as experienced men,
 Counsel is given; contention they appease
 With gentle language, in remotest wilds,
 Tears wipe away, and pleasant tidings bring;
 Could the proud quest of chivalry do more?"

 "Happy," rejoined the Wanderer, "they who gain
 A panegyric from your generous tongue!
 But, if to these Wayfarers once pertained
 Aught of romantic interest, it is gone.
 Their purer service, in this realm at least,
 Is past for ever. An inventive Age
 Has wrought, if not with speed of magic, yet
 To most strange issues. I have lived to mark
 A new and unforeseen creation rise
 From out the labours of a peaceful Land
 Wielding her potent enginery to frame
 And to produce, with appetite as keen
 As that of war, which rests not night or day,
 Industrious to destroy! With fruitless pains
 Might one like me 'now' visit many a tract
 Which, in his youth, he trod, and trod again,
 A lone pedestrian with a scanty freight,
 Wished-for, or welcome, wheresoe'er he came
 Among the tenantry of thorpe and vill;
 Or straggling burgh, of ancient charter proud,
 And dignified by battlements and towers
 Of some stern castle, mouldering on the brow
 Of a green hill or bank of rugged stream.
 The foot-path faintly marked, the horse-track wild,
 And formidable length of plashy lane,
 (Prized avenues ere others had been shaped
 Or easier links connecting place with place)
 Have vanished swallowed up by stately roads
 Easy and bold, that penetrate the gloom
 Of Britain's farthest glens. The Earth has lent
 Her waters, Air her breezes; and the sail
 Of traffic glides with ceaseless intercourse,
 Glistening along the low and woody dale;
 Or, in its progress, on the lofty side,
 Of some bare hill, with wonder kenned from far.

 Meanwhile, at social Industry's command,
 How quick, how vast an increase! From the germ
 Of some poor hamlet, rapidly produced
 Here a huge town, continuous and compact,
 Hiding the face of earth for leagues and there,
 Where not a habitation stood before,
 Abodes of men irregularly massed
 Like trees in forests, spread through spacious tracts,
 O'er which the smoke of unremitting fires
 Hangs permanent, and plentiful as wreaths
 Of vapour glittering in the morning sun.
 And, wheresoe'er the traveller turns his steps,
 He sees the barren wilderness erased,
 Or disappearing; triumph that proclaims
 How much the mild Directress of the plough
 Owes to alliance with these new-born arts!
 Hence is the wide sea peopled, hence the shores
 Of Britain are resorted to by ships
 Freighted from every climate of the world
 With the world's choicest produce. Hence that sum
 Of keels that rest within her crowded ports,
 Or ride at anchor in her sounds and bays;
 That animating spectacle of sails
 That, through her inland regions, to and fro
 Pass with the respirations of the tide,
 Perpetual, multitudinous! Finally,
 Hence a dread arm of floating power, a voice
 Of thunder daunting those who would approach
 With hostile purposes the blessed Isle,
 Truth's consecrated residence, the seat
 Impregnable of Liberty and Peace.

 And yet, O happy Pastor of a flock
 Faithfully watched, and, by that loving care
 And Heaven's good providence, preserved from taint!
 With you I grieve, when on the darker side
 Of this great change I look; and there behold
 Such outrage done to nature as compels
 The indignant power to justify herself;
 Yea, to avenge her violated rights,
 For England's bane. When soothing darkness spreads
 O'er hill and vale," the Wanderer thus expressed
 His recollections, "and the punctual stars,
 While all things else are gathering to their homes,
 Advance, and in the firmament of heaven
 Glitter but undisturbing, undisturbed;
 As if their silent company were charged
 With peaceful admonitions for the heart
 Of all-beholding Man, earth's thoughtful lord;
 Then, in full many a region, once like this
 The assured domain of calm simplicity
 And pensive quiet, an unnatural light
 Prepared for never-resting Labour's eyes
 Breaks from a many-windowed fabric huge;
 And at the appointed hour a bell is heard
 Of harsher import than the curfew-knoll
 That spake the Norman Conqueror's stern behest
 A local summons to unceasing toil!
 Disgorged are now the ministers of day;
 And, as they issue from the illumined pile,
 A fresh band meets them, at the crowded door
 And in the courts and where the rumbling stream,
 That turns the multitude of dizzy wheels,
 Glares, like a troubled spirit, in its bed
 Among the rocks below. Men, maidens, youths,
 Mother and little children, boys and girls,
 Enter, and each the wonted task resumes
 Within this temple, where is offered up
 To Gain, the master idol of the realm,
 Perpetual sacrifice. Even thus of old
 Our ancestors, within the still domain
 Of vast cathedral or conventual church,
 Their vigils kept; where tapers day and might
 On the dim altar burned continually,
 In token that the House was evermore
 Watching to God. Religious men were they;
 Nor would their reason, tutored to aspire
 Above this transitory world, allow
 That there should pass a moment of the year,
 When in their land the Almighty's service ceased.

 Triumph who will in these profaner rites
 Which we, a generation self-extolled,
 As zealously perform! I cannot share
 His proud complacency: yet do I exult,
 Casting reserve away, exult to see
 An intellectual mastery exercised
 O'er the blind elements; a purpose given,
 A perseverance fed; almost a soul
 Imparted to brute matter. I rejoice,
 Measuring the force of those gigantic powers
 That, by the thinking mind, have been compelled
 To serve the will of feeble-bodied Man.
 For with the sense of admiration blends
 The animating hope that time may come
 When, strengthened, yet not dazzled, by the might
 Of this dominion over nature gained,
 Men of all lands shall exercise the same
 In due proportion to their country's need;
 Learning, though late, that all true glory rests,
 All praise, all safety, and all happiness,
 Upon the moral law. Egyptian Thebes,
 Tyre, by the margin of the sounding waves,
 Palmyra, central in the desert, fell;
 And the Arts died by which they had been raised.
 Call Archimedes from his buried tomb
 Upon the grave of vanished Syracuse,
 And feelingly the Sage shall make report
 How insecure, how baseless in itself,
 Is the Philosophy whose sway depends
 On mere material instruments; how weak
 Those arts, and high inventions, if unpropped
 By virtue. He, sighing with pensive grief,
 Amid his calm abstractions, would admit
 That not the slender privilege is theirs
 To save themselves from blank forgetfulness!"

 When from the Wanderer's lips these words had fallen,
 I said, "And, did in truth those vaunted Arts
 Possess such privilege, how could we escape
 Sadness and keen regret, we who revere,
 And would preserve as things above all price,
 The old domestic morals of the land,
 Her simple manners, and the stable worth
 That dignified and cheered a low estate?
 Oh! where is now the character of peace,
 Sobriety, and order, and chaste love,
 And honest dealing, and untainted speech,
 And pure good-will, and hospitable cheer;
 That made the very thought of country-life
 A thought of refuge, for a mind detained
 Reluctantly amid the bustling crowd?
 Where now the beauty of the sabbath kept
 With conscientious reverence, as a day
 By the almighty Lawgiver pronounced
 Holy and blest? and where the winning grace
 Of all the lighter ornaments attached
 To time and season, as the year rolled round?"

 "Fled!" was the Wanderer's passionate response,
 "Fled utterly! or only to be traced
 In a few fortunate retreats like this;
 Which I behold with trembling, when I think
 What lamentable change, a year a month
 May bring; that brook converting as it runs
 Into an instrument of deadly bane
 For those, who, yet untempted to forsake
 The simple occupations of their sires,
 Drink the pure water of its innocent stream
 With lip almost as pure. Domestic bliss
 (Or call it comfort, by a humbler name,)
 How art thou blighted for the poor Man's heart!
 Lo! in such neighbourhood, from morn to eve,
 The habitations empty! or perchance
 The Mother left alone, no helping hand
 To rock the cradle of her peevish babe;
 No daughters round her, busy at the wheel,
 Or in dispatch of each day's little growth
 Of household occupation; no nice arts
 Of needle-work; no bustle at the fire,
 Where once the dinner was prepared with pride;
 Nothing to speed the day, or cheer the mind;
 Nothing to praise to teach, or to command!

 The Father, if perchance he still retain
 His old employments, goes to field or wood,
 No longer led or followed by the Sons;
 Idlers perchance they were, but in 'his' sight;
 Breathing fresh air, and treading the green earth:
 'Till their short holiday of childhood ceased,
 Ne'er to return! That birthright now is lost.
 Economists will tell you that the State
 Thrives by the forfeiture unfeeling thought,
 And false as monstrous! Can the mother thrive
 By the destruction of her innocent sons
 In whom a premature necessity
 Blocks out the forms of nature, preconsumes
 The reason, famishes the heart, shuts up
 The infant Being in itself, and makes
 Its very spring a season of decay!
 The lot is wretched, the condition sad,
 Whether a pining discontent survive,
 And thirst for change; or habit hath subdued
 The soul deprest, dejected even to love
 Of her close tasks, and long captivity.

 Oh, banish far such wisdom as condemns
 A native Briton to these inward chains,
 Fixed in his soul, so early and so deep;
 Without his own consent, or knowledge, fixed!
 He is a slave to whom release comes not,
 And cannot come. The boy, where'er he turns,
 Is still a prisoner; when the wind is up
 Among the clouds, and roars through the ancient woods;
 Or when the sun is shining in the east,
 Quiet and calm. Behold him in the school
 Of his attainments? no; but with the air
 Fanning his temples under heaven's blue arch.
 His raiment, whitened o'er with cotton-flakes
 Or locks of wool, announces whence he comes.
 Creeping his gait and cowering, his lip pale,
 His respiration quick and audible;
 And scarcely could you fancy that a gleam
 Could break from out those languid eyes, or a blush
 Mantle upon his cheek. Is this the form,
 Is that the countenance, and such the port,
 Of no mean Being? One who should be clothed
 With dignity befitting his proud hope;
 Who, in his very childhood, should appear
 Sublime from present purity and joy!
 The limbs increase; but liberty of mind
 Is gone for ever; and this organic frame,
 So joyful in its motions, is become
 Dull, to the joy of her own motions dead;
 And even the touch, so exquisitely poured
 Through the whole body, with a languid will
 Performs its functions; rarely competent
 To impress a vivid feeling on the mind
 Of what there is delightful in the breeze,
 The gentle visitations of the sun,
 Or lapse of liquid element by hand,
 Or foot, or lip, in summer's warmth perceived.
 Can hope look forward to a manhood raised
 On such foundations?"
 "Hope is none for him!"
 The pale Recluse indignantly exclaimed,
 "And tens of thousands suffer wrong as deep.
 Yet be it asked, in justice to our age,
 If there were not, before those arts appeared,
 These structures rose, commingling old and young,
 And unripe sex with sex, for mutual taint;
 If there were not, 'then', in our far-famed Isle,
 Multitudes, who from infancy had breathed
 Air unimprisoned, and had lived at large;
 Yet walked beneath the sun, in human shape,
 As abject, as degraded? At this day,
 Who shall enumerate the crazy huts
 And tottering hovels, whence do issue forth
 A ragged Offspring, with their upright hair
 Crowned like the image of fantastic Fear;
 Or wearing, (shall we say?) in that white growth
 An ill-adjusted turban, for defence
 Or fierceness, wreathed around their sunburnt brows,
 By savage Nature? Shrivelled are their lips,
 Naked, and coloured like the soil, the feet
 On which they stand; as if thereby they drew
 Some nourishment, as trees do by their roots,
 From earth, the common mother of us all.
 Figure and mien, complexion and attire,
 Are leagued to strike dismay; but outstretched hand
 And whining voice denote them supplicants
 For the least boon that pity can bestow.
 Such on the breast of darksome heaths are found;
 And with their parents occupy the skirts
 Of furze-clad commons; such are born and reared
 At the mine's mouth under impending rocks;
 Or dwell in chambers of some natural cave;
 Or where their ancestors erected huts,
 For the convenience of unlawful gain,
 In forest purlieus; and the like are bred,
 All England through, where nooks and slips of ground
 Purloined, in times less jealous than our own,
 From the green margin of the public way,
 A residence afford them, 'mid the bloom
 And gaiety of cultivated fields.
 Such (we will hope the lowest in the scale)
 Do I remember oft-times to have seen
 'Mid Buxton's dreary heights. In earnest watch,
 Till the swift vehicle approach, they stand;
 Then, following closely with the cloud of dust,
 An uncouth feat exhibit, and are gone
 Heels over head, like tumblers on a stage.
 Up from the ground they snatch the copper coin,
 And, on the freight of merry passengers
 Fixing a steady eye, maintain their speed;
 And spin and pant and overhead again,
 Wild pursuivants! until their breath is lost,
 Or bounty tires and every face, that smiled
 Encouragement, hath ceased to look that way.
 But, like the vagrants of the gipsy tribe,
 These, bred to little pleasure in themselves,
 Are profitless to others.
 Turn we then
 To Britons born and bred within the pale
 Of civil polity, and early trained
 To earn, by wholesome labour in the field,
 The bread they eat. A sample should I give
 Of what this stock hath long produced to enrich
 The tender age of life, ye would exclaim,
 'Is this the whistling plough-boy whose shrill notes
 Impart new gladness to the morning air!'
 Forgive me if I venture to suspect
 That many, sweet to hear of in soft verse,
 Are of no finer frame. Stiff are his joints;
 Beneath a cumbrous frock, that to the knees
 Invests the thriving churl, his legs appear,
 Fellows to those that lustily upheld
 The wooden stools for everlasting use,
 Whereon our fathers sate. And mark his brow
 Under whose shaggy canopy are set
 Two eyes not dim, but of a healthy stare
 Wide, sluggish, blank, and ignorant, and strange
 Proclaiming boldly that they never drew
 A look or motion of intelligence
 From infant-conning of the Christ-crossrow,
 Or puzzling through a primer, line by line,
 Till perfect mastery crown the pains at last.
 What kindly warmth from touch of fostering hand,
 What penetrating power of sun or breeze,
 Shall e'er dissolve the crust wherein his soul
 Sleeps, like a caterpillar sheathed in ice?
 This torpor is no pitiable work
 Of modern ingenuity; no town
 Nor crowded city can be taxed with aught
 Of sottish vice or desperate breach of law,
 To which (and who can tell where or how soon?)
 He may be roused. This Boy the fields produce:
 His spade and hoe, mattock and glittering scythe,
 The carter's whip that on his shoulder rests
 In air high-towering with a boorish pomp,
 The sceptre of his sway; his country's name,
 Her equal rights, her churches and her schools
 What have they done for him? And, let me ask,
 For tens of thousands uninformed as he?
 In brief, what liberty of 'mind' is here?"

 This ardent sally pleased the mild good Man,
 To whom the appeal couched in its closing words
 Was pointedly addressed; and to the thoughts
 That, in assent or opposition, rose
 Within his mind, he seemed prepared to give
 Prompt utterance; but the Vicar interposed
 With invitation urgently renewed.
 We followed, taking as he led, a path
 Along a hedge of hollies dark and tall,
 Whose flexile boughs low bending with a weight
 Of leafy spray, concealed the stems and roots
 That gave them nourishment. When frosty winds
 Howl from the north, what kindly warmth, methought,
 Is here how grateful this impervious screen!
 Not shaped by simple wearing of the foot
 On rural business passing to and fro
 Was the commodious walk: a careful hand
 Had marked the line, and strewn its surface o'er
 With pure cerulean gravel, from the heights
 Fetched by a neighbouring brook. Across the vale
 The stately fence accompanied our steps;
 And thus the pathway, by perennial green
 Guarded and graced, seemed fashioned to unite,
 As by a beautiful yet solemn chain,
 The Pastor's mansion with the house of prayer.

 Like image of solemnity, conjoined
 With feminine allurement soft and fair,
 The mansion's self displayed; a reverend pile
 With bold projections and recesses deep;
 Shadowy, yet gay and lightsome as it stood
 Fronting the noontide sun. We paused to admire
 The pillared porch, elaborately embossed;
 The low wide windows with their mullions old;
 The cornice, richly fretted, of grey stone;
 And that smooth slope from which the dwelling rose,
 By beds and banks Arcadian of gay flowers
 And flowering shrubs, protected and adorned:
 Profusion bright! and every flower assuming
 A more than natural vividness of hue,
 From unaffected contrast with the gloom
 Of sober cypress, and the darker foil
 Of yew, in which survived some traces, here
 Not unbecoming, of grotesque device
 And uncouth fancy. From behind the roof
 Rose the slim ash and massy sycamore,
 Blending their diverse foliage with the green
 Of ivy, flourishing and thick, that clasped
 The huge round chimneys, harbour of delight
 For wren and redbreast, where they sit and sing
 Their slender ditties when the trees are bare.
 Nor must I leave untouched (the picture else
 Were incomplete) a relique of old times
 Happily spared, a little Gothic niche
 Of nicest workmanship; that once had held
 The sculptured image of some patron-saint,
 Or of the blessed Virgin, looking down
 On all who entered those religious doors.

 But lo! where from the rocky garden-mount
 Crowned by its antique summer-house descends,
 Light as the silver fawn, a radiant Girl;
 For she hath recognised her honoured friend,
 The Wanderer ever welcome! A prompt kiss
 The gladsome Child bestows at his request;
 And, up the flowery lawn as we advance,
 Hangs on the old Man with a happy look,
 And with a pretty restless hand of love.
 We enter by the Lady of the place
 Cordially greeted. Graceful was her port:
 A lofty stature undepressed by time,
 Whose visitation had not wholly spared
 The finer lineaments of form and face;
 To that complexion brought which prudence trusts in
 And wisdom loves. But when a stately ship
 Sails in smooth weather by the placid coast
 On homeward voyage, what if wind and wave,
 And hardship undergone in various climes,
 Have caused her to abate the virgin pride,
 And that full trim of inexperienced hope
 With which she left her haven not for this,
 Should the sun strike her, and the impartial breeze
 Play on her streamers, fails she to assume
 Brightness and touching beauty of her own,
 That charm all eyes. So bright, so fair, appeared
 This goodly Matron, shining in the beams
 Of unexpected pleasure. Soon the board
 Was spread, and we partook a plain repast.

 Here, resting in cool shelter, we beguiled
 The mid-day hours with desultory talk;
 From trivial themes to general argument
 Passing, as accident or fancy led,
 Or courtesy prescribed. While question rose
 And answer flowed, the fetters of reserve
 Dropping from every mind, the Solitary
 Resumed the manners of his happier days;
 And in the various conversation bore
 A willing, nay, at times, a forward part;
 Yet with the grace of one who in the world
 Had learned the art of pleasing, and had now
 Occasion given him to display his skill,
 Upon the stedfast 'vantage-ground of truth.
 He gazed, with admiration unsuppressed,
 Upon the landscape of the sun-bright vale,
 Seen, from the shady room in which we sate,
 In softened perspective; and more than once
 Praised the consummate harmony serene
 Of gravity and elegance, diffused
 Around the mansion and its whole domain;
 Not, doubtless, without help of female taste
 And female care. "A blessed lot is yours!"
 The words escaped his lip, with a tender sigh
 Breathed over them: but suddenly the door
 Flew open, and a pair of lusty Boys
 Appeared, confusion checking their delight.
 Not brothers they in feature or attire,
 But fond companions, so I guessed, in field,
 And by the river's margin whence they come,
 Keen anglers with unusual spoil elated.
 One bears a willow-pannier on his back,
 The boy of plainer garb, whose blush survives
 More deeply tinged. Twin might the other be
 To that fair girl who from the garden-mount
 Bounded: triumphant entry this for him!
 Between his hands he holds a smooth blue stone,
 On whose capacious surface see outspread
 Large store of gleaming crimson-spotted trouts;
 Ranged side by side, and lessening by degrees
 Up to the dwarf that tops the pinnacle.
 Upon the board he lays the sky-blue stone
 With its rich freight; their number he proclaims;
 Tells from what pool the noblest had been dragged;
 And where the very monarch of the brook,
 After long struggle, had escaped at last
 Stealing alternately at them and us
 (As doth his comrade too) a look of pride:
 And, verily, the silent creatures made
 A splendid sight, together thus exposed;
 Dead but not sullied or deformed by death,
 That seemed to pity what he could not spare.

 But oh, the animation in the mien
 Of those two boys! yea in the very words
 With which the young narrator was inspired,
 When, as our questions led, he told at large
 Of that day's prowess! Him might I compare,
 His looks, tones, gestures, eager eloquence,
 To a bold brook that splits for better speed,
 And at the self-same moment, works its way
 Through many channels, ever and anon
 Parted and re-united: his compeer
 To the still lake, whose stillness is to sight
 As beautiful as grateful to the mind.
 But to what object shall the lovely Girl
 Be likened? She whose countenance and air
 Unite the graceful qualities of both,
 Even as she shares the pride and joy of both.

 My grey-haired Friend was moved; his vivid eye
 Glistened with tenderness; his mind, I knew,
 Was full; and had, I doubted not, returned,
 Upon this impulse, to the theme erewhile
 Abruptly broken off. The ruddy boys
 Withdrew, on summons to their well-earned meal;
 And He to whom all tongues resigned their rights
 With willingness, to whom the general ear
 Listened with readier patience than to strain
 Of music, lute or harp, a long delight
 That ceased not when his voice had ceased as One
 Who from truth's central point serenely views
 The compass of his argument began
 Mildly, and with a clear and steady tone.

