---
author: William Wordsworth 
title: Lines Written In The Album Of The Countess Of Lonsdale. Nov. 5, 1834
---

 Lady! a Pen (perhaps with thy regard,
 Among the Favoured, favoured not the least)
 Left, 'mid the Records of this Book inscribed,
 Deliberate traces, registers of thought
 And feeling, suited to the place and time
 That gave them birth: months passed, and still this hand,
 That had not been too timid to imprint
 Words which the virtues of thy Lord inspired,
 Was yet not bold enough to write of Thee.
 And why that scrupulous reserve? In sooth
 The blameless cause lay in the Theme itself.
 Flowers are there many that delight to strive
 With the sharp wind, and seem to court the shower,
 Yet are by nature careless of the sun
 Whether he shine on them or not; and some,
 Where'er he moves along the unclouded sky,
 Turn a broad front full on his flattering beams:
 Others do rather from their notice shrink,
 Loving the dewy shade, a humble band,
 Modest and sweet, a progeny of earth,
 Congenial with thy mind and character,
 High-born Augusta!
 
 Witness, Towers and Groves!
 And Thou, wild Stream, that giv'st the honoured name
 Of Lowther to this ancient Line, bear witness
 From thy most secret haunts; and ye Parterres,
 Which She is pleased and proud to call her own,
 Witness how oft upon my noble Friend
 'Mute' offerings, tribute from an inward sense
 Of admiration and respectful love,
 Have waited till the affections could no more
 Endure that silence, and broke out in song,
 Snatches of music taken up and dropt
 Like those self-solacing, those under, notes
 Trilled by the redbreast, when autumnal leaves
 Are thin upon the bough. Mine, only mine,
 The pleasure was, and no one heard the praise,
 Checked, in the moment of its issue, checked
 And reprehended, by a fancied blush
 From the pure qualities that called it forth.
 
 Thus Virtue lives debarred from Virtue's meed;
 Thus, Lady, is retiredness a veil
 That, while it only spreads a softening charm
 O'er features looked at by discerning eyes,
 Hides half their beauty from the common gaze;
 And thus, even on the exposed and breezy hill
 Of lofty station, female goodness walks,
 When side by side with lunar gentleness,
 As in a cloister. Yet the grateful Poor
 (Such the immunities of low estate,
 Plain Nature's enviable privilege,
 Her sacred recompense for many wants
 Open their hearts before Thee, pouring out
 All that they think and feel, with tears of joy;
 And benedictions not unheard in heaven:
 And friend in the ear of friend, where speech is free
 To follow truth, is eloquent as they.
 
 Then let the Book receive in these prompt lines
 A just memorial; and thine eyes consent
 To read that they, who mark thy course, behold
 A life declining with the golden light
 Of summer, in the season of sere leaves;
 See cheerfulness undamped by stealing Time;
 See studied kindness flow with easy stream,
 Illustrated with inborn courtesy;
 And an habitual disregard of self
 Balanced by vigilance for others' weal.
 
 And shall the Verse not tell of lighter gifts
 With these ennobling attributes conjoined
 And blended, in peculiar harmony,
 By Youth's surviving spirit? What agile grace!
 A nymph-like liberty, in nymph-like form,
 Beheld with wonder; whether floor or path
 Thou tread; or sweep borne on the managed steed
 Fleet as the shadows, over down or field,
 Driven by strong winds at play among the clouds.
 
 Yet one word more, one farewell word, a wish
 Which came, but it has passed into a prayer
 That, as thy sun in brightness is declining,
 So at an hour yet distant for 'their' sakes
 Whose tender love, here faltering on the way
 Of a diviner love, will be forgiven
 So may it set in peace, to rise again
 For everlasting glory won by faith.
