---
author: William Wordsworth 
title: Memorials Of A Tour On The Continent, 1820 - XXVI. - The Eclipse Of The Sun, 1820
---

 High on her speculative tower
 Stood Science waiting for the hour
 When Sol was destined to endure
 'That' darkening of his radiant face
 Which Superstition strove to chase,
 Erewhile, with rites impure.

 Afloat beneath Italian skies,
 Through regions fair as Paradise
 We gaily passed, till Nature wrought
 A silent and unlooked-for change,
 That checked the desultory range
 Of joy and sprightly thought.

 Where'er was dipped the toiling oar,
 The waves danced round us as before,
 As lightly, though of altered hue,
 'Mid recent coolness, such as falls
 At noontide from umbrageous walls
 That screen the morning dew.

 No vapour stretched its wings; no cloud
 Cast far or near a murky shroud;
 The sky an azure field displayed;
 'Twas sunlight sheathed and gently charmed,
 Of all its sparkling rays disarmed,
 And as in slumber laid,

 Or something night and day between,
 Like moonshine, but the hue was green;
 Still moonshine, without shadow, spread
 On jutting rock, and curved shore,
 Where gazed the peasant from his door
 And on the mountain's head.

 It tinged the Julian steeps it lay,
 Lugano! on thy ample bay;
 The solemnizing veil was drawn
 O'er villas, terraces, and towers;
 To Albogasio's olive bowers,
 Porlezza's verdant lawn.

 But Fancy with the speed of fire
 Hath passed to Milan's loftiest spire,
 And there alights 'mid that aerial host
 Of Figures human and divine,
 White as the snows of Apennine
 Indurated by frost.

 Awe-stricken she beholds the array
 That guards the Temple night and day;
 Angels she sees, that might from heaven have flown,
 And Virgin-saints, who not in vain
 Have striven by purity to gain
 The beatific crown

 Sees long-drawn files, concentric rings
 Each narrowing above each; the wings,
 The uplifted palms, the silent marble lips
 The starry zone of sovereign height
 All steeped in this portentous light!
 All suffering dim eclipse!

 Thus after Man had fallen (if aught
 These perishable spheres have wrought
 May with that issue be compared)
 Throngs of celestial visages,
 Darkening like water in the breeze,
 A holy sadness shared.

 Lo! while I speak, the labouring Sun
 His glad deliverance has begun:
 The cypress waves her sombre plume
 More cheerily; and town and tower,
 The vineyard and the olive-bower,
 Their lustre re-assume!

 O Ye, who guard and grace my home
 While in far-distant lands we roam,
 What countenance hath this Day put on for you?
 While we looked round with favoured eyes,
 Did sullen mists hide lake and skies
 And mountains from your view?

 Or was it given you to behold
 Like vision, pensive though not cold,
 From the smooth breast of gay Winandermere?
 Saw ye the soft yet awful veil
 Spread over Grasmere's lovely dale,
 Helvellyn's brow severe?

 I ask in vain, and know far less
 If sickness, sorrow, or distress
 Have spared my Dwelling to this hour;
 Sad blindness! but ordained to prove
 Our faith in Heaven's unfailing love
 And all-controlling power.
