---
author: William Wordsworth 
title: To The Clouds
---

 Army of Clouds! ye winged Hosts in troops
 Ascending from behind the motionless brow
 Of that tall rock, as from a hidden world,
 Oh whither with such eagerness of speed?
 What seek ye, or what shun ye? of the gale
 Companions, fear ye to be left behind,
 Or racing o'er your blue ethereal field
 Contend ye with each other? of the sea
 Children, thus post ye over vale and height
 To sink upon your's mother's lap and rest?
 Or were ye rightlier hailed, when first mine eyes
 Beheld in your impetuous march the likeness
 Of a wide army pressing on to meet
 Or overtake some unknown enemy?
 But your smooth motions suit a peaceful aim;
 And Fancy, not less aptly pleased, compares
 Your squadrons to an endless flight of birds
 Aerial, upon due migration bound
 To milder climes; or rather do ye urge
 In caravan your hasty pilgrimage
 To pause at last on more aspiring heights
 Than these, and utter your devotion there
 With thunderous voice? Or are ye jubilant,
 And would ye, tracking your proud lord the Sun,
 Be present at his setting; or the pomp
 Of Persian mornings would ye fill, and stand
 Poising your splendours high above the heads
 Of worshipers kneeling to their up-risen God?
 Whence, whence, ye Clouds! this eagerness of speed?
 Speak, silent creatures. They are gone, are fled,
 Buried together in yon gloomy mass
 That loads the middle heaven; and clear and bright
 And vacant doth the region which they thronged
 Appear; a calm descent of sky conducting
 Down to the unapproachable abyss,
 Down to that hidden gulf from which they rose
 To vanish, fleet as days and months and years,
 Fleet as the generations of mankind,
 Power, glory, empire, as the world itself,
 The lingering world, when time hath ceased to be.
 But the winds roar, shaking the rooted trees,
 And see! a bright precursor to a train
 Perchance as numerous, overpeers the rock
 That sullenly refuses to partake
 Of the wild impulse. From a fount of life
 Invisible, the long procession moves
 Luminous or gloomy, welcome to the vale
 Which they are entering, welcome to mine eye
 That sees them, to my soul that owns in them,
 And in the bosom of the firmament
 O'er which they move, wherein they are contained,
 A type of her capacious self and all
 Her restless progeny.
 
 A humble walk
 Here is my body doomed to tread, this path,
 A little hoary line and faintly traced,
 Work, shall we call it, of the shepherd's foot
 Or of his flock? joint vestige of them both.
 I pace it unrepining, for my thoughts
 Admit no bondage and my words have wings.
 Where is the Orphean lyre, or Druid harp,
 To accompany the verse? The mountain blast
 Shall be our 'hand' of music; he shall sweep
 The rocks, and quivering trees, and billowy lake,
 And search the fibres of the caves, and they
 Shall answer, for our song is of the Clouds
 And the wind loves them; and the gentle gales
 Which by their aid re-clothe the naked lawn
 With annual verdure, and revive the woods,
 And moisten the parched lips of thirsty flowers
 Love them; and every idle breeze of air
 Bends to the favourite burthen. Moon and stars
 Keep their most solemn vigils when the Clouds
 Watch also, shifting peaceably their place
 Like bands of ministering Spirits, or when they lie,
 As if some Protean art the change had wrought,
 In listless quiet o'er the ethereal deep
 Scattered, a Cyclades of various shapes
 And all degrees of beauty. O ye Lightnings!
 Ye are their perilous offspring; and the Sun
 Source inexhaustible of life and joy,
 And type of man's far-darting reason, therefore
 In old time worshiped as the god of verse,
 A blazing intellectual deity
 Loves his own glory in their looks, and showers
 Upon that unsubstantial brotherhood
 Visions with all but beatific light
 Enriched too transient were they not renewed
 From age to age, and did not, while we gaze
 In silent rapture, credulous desire
 Nourish the hope that memory lacks not power
 To keep the treasure unimpaired. Vain thought!
 Yet why repine, created as we are
 For joy and rest, albeit to find them only
 Lodged in the bosom of eternal things?
