---
author: William Wordsworth 
title: Memorials Of A Tour In Scotland 1814 - III. Effusion - In The Pleasure-Ground On The Banks Of The Bran, Near Dunkeld
---

 What He who, 'mid the kindred throng
 Of Heroes that inspired his song,
 Doth yet frequent the hill of storms,
 The stars dim-twinkling through their forms!
 What! Ossian here, a painted Thrall,
 Mute fixture on a stuccoed wall;
 To serve, an unsuspected screen
 For show that must not yet be seen;
 And, when the moment comes, to part
 And vanish by mysterious art;
 Head, harp, and body, split asunder,
 For ingress to a world of wonder;
 A gay saloon, with waters dancing
 Upon the sight wherever glancing;
 One loud cascade in front, and lo!
 A thousand like it, white as snow
 Streams on the walls, and torrent-foam
 As active round the hollow dome,
 Illusive cataracts! of their terrors
 Not stripped, nor voiceless in the mirrors,
 That catch the pageant from the flood
 Thundering adown a rocky wood.
 What pains to dazzle and confound!
 What strife of colour, shape and sound
 In this quaint medley, that might seem
 Devised out of a sick man's dream!
 Strange scene, fantastic and uneasy
 As ever made a maniac dizzy,
 When disenchanted from the mood
 That loves on sullen thoughts to brood!
 O Nature in thy changeful visions,
 Through all thy most abrupt transitions
 Smooth, graceful, tender, or sublime
 Ever averse to pantomime,
 Thee neither do they know nor us
 Thy servants, who can trifle thus;
 Else verily the sober powers
 Of rock that frowns, and stream that roars,
 Exalted by congenial sway
 Of Spirits, and the undying Lay,
 And Names that moulder not away,
 Had wakened some redeeming thought
 More worthy of this favoured Spot;
 Recalled some feeling, to set free
 The Bard from such indignity!
 The Effigies of a valiant Wight
 I once beheld, a Templar Knight;
 Not prostrate, not like those that rest
 On tombs, with palms together prest,
 But sculptured out of living stone,
 And standing upright and alone,
 Both hands with rival energy
 Employed in setting his sword free
 From its dull sheath, stern sentinel
 Intent to guard St. Robert's cell;
 As if with memory of the affray
 Far distant, when, as legends say,
 The Monks of Fountain's thronged to force
 From its dear home the Hermit's corse,
 That in their keeping it might lie,
 To crown their abbey's sanctity.
 So had they rushed into the grot
 Of sense despised, a world forgot,
 And torn him from his loved retreat,
 Where altar-stone and rock-hewn seat
 Still hint that quiet best is found,
 Even by the 'Living', under ground;
 But a bold Knight, the selfish aim
 Defeating, put the monks to shame,
 There where you see his Image stand
 Bare to the sky, with threatening brand
 Which lingering NID is proud to show
 Reflected in the pool below.
 Thus, like the men of earliest days,
 Our sires set forth their grateful praise:
 Uncouth the workmanship, and rude!
 But, nursed in mountain solitude,
 Might some aspiring artist dare
 To seize whate'er, through misty air,
 A ghost, by glimpses, may present
 Of imitable lineament,
 And give the phantom an array
 That less should scorn the abandoned clay;
 Then let him hew with patient stroke
 An Ossian out of mural rock,
 And leave the figurative Man
 Upon thy margin, roaring Bran!
 Fixed, like the Templar of the steep,
 An everlasting watch to keep;
 With local sanctities in trust,
 More precious than a hermit's dust;
 And virtues through the mass infused,
 Which old idolatry abused.
 What though the Granite would deny
 All fervour to the sightless eye;
 And touch from rising suns in vain
 Solicit a Memnonian strain;
 Yet, in some fit of anger sharp,
 The wind might force the deep-grooved harp
 To utter melancholy moans
 Not unconnected with the tones
 Of soul-sick flesh and weary bones;
 While grove and river notes would lend,
 Less deeply sad, with these to blend!
 Vain pleasures of luxurious life,
 For ever with yourselves at strife;
 Through town and country both deranged
 By affectations interchanged,
 And all the perishable gauds
 That heaven-deserted man applauds;
 When will your hapless patrons learn
 To watch and ponder, to discern
 The freshness, the everlasting youth,
 Of admiration sprung from truth;
 From beauty infinitely growing
 Upon a mind with love o'erflowing
 To sound the depths of every Art
 That seeks its wisdom through the heart?
 Thus (where the intrusive Pile, ill-graced
 With baubles of theatric taste,
 O'erlooks the torrent breathing showers
 On motley bands of alien flowers
 In stiff confusion set or sown,
 Till Nature cannot find her own,
 Or keep a remnant of the sod
 Which Caledonian Heroes trod)
 I mused; and, thirsting for redress,
 Recoiled into the wilderness.
