---
author: William Wordsworth 
title: The Excursion - Book Fourth - Despondency Corrected
---

 Here closed the Tenant of that lonely vale
 His mournful narrative commenced in pain,
 In pain commenced, and ended without peace:
 Yet tempered, not unfrequently, with strains
 Of native feeling, grateful to our minds;
 And yielding surely some relief to his,
 While we sate listening with compassion due.
 A pause of silence followed; then, with voice
 That did not falter though the heart was moved,
 The Wanderer said:
 "One adequate support
 For the calamities of mortal life
 Exists one only; an assured belief
 That the procession of our fate, howe'er
 Sad or disturbed, is ordered by a Being
 Of infinite benevolence and power;
 Whose everlasting purposes embrace
 All accidents, converting them to good.
 The darts of anguish 'fix' not where the seat
 Of suffering hath been thoroughly fortified
 By acquiescence in the Will supreme
 For time and for eternity; by faith,
 Faith absolute in God, including hope,
 And the defence that lies in boundless love
 Of his perfections; with habitual dread
 Of aught unworthily conceived, endured
 Impatiently, ill-done, or left undone,
 To the dishonour of his holy name.
 Soul of our Souls, and safeguard of the world!
 Sustain, thou only canst, the sick of heart;
 Restore their languid spirits, and recall
 Their lost affections unto thee and thine!"

 Then, as we issued from that covert nook,
 He thus continued, lifting up his eyes
 To heaven: "How beautiful this dome of sky;
 And the vast hills, in fluctuation fixed
 At thy command, how awful! Shall the Soul,
 Human and rational, report of thee
 Even less than these? Be mute who will, who can,
 Yet I will praise thee with impassioned voice:
 My lips, that may forget thee in the crowd,
 Cannot forget thee here; where thou hast built,
 For thy own glory, in the wilderness!
 Me didst thou constitute a priest of thine,
 In such a temple as we now behold
 Reared for thy presence: therefore, am I bound
 To worship, here, and everywhere as one
 Not doomed to ignorance, though forced to tread,
 From childhood up, the ways of poverty;
 From unreflecting ignorance preserved,
 And from debasement rescued. By thy grace
 The particle divine remained unquenched;
 And, 'mid the wild weeds of a rugged soil,
 Thy bounty caused to flourish deathless flowers,
 From paradise transplanted: wintry age
 Impends; the frost will gather round my heart;
 If the flowers wither, I am worse than dead!
 Come, labour, when the worn-out frame requires
 Perpetual sabbath; come, disease and want;
 And sad exclusion through decay of sense;
 But leave me unabated trust in thee
 And let thy favour, to the end of life,
 Inspire me with ability to seek
 Repose and hope among eternal things
 Father of heaven and earth! and I am rich,
 And will possess my portion in content!

 And what are things eternal? powers depart,"
 The grey-haired Wanderer stedfastly replied,
 Answering the question which himself had asked,
 "Possessions vanish, and opinions change,
 And passions hold a fluctuating seat:
 But, by the storms of circumstance unshaken,
 And subject neither to eclipse nor wane,
 Duty exists; immutably survive,
 For our support, the measures and the forms,
 Which an abstract intelligence supplies;
 Whose kingdom is, where time and space are not.
 Of other converse which mind, soul, and heart,
 Do, with united urgency, require,
 What more that may not perish? Thou, dread source,
 Prime, self-existing cause and end of all
 That in the scale of being fill their place;
 Above our human region, or below,
 Set and sustained; thou, who didst wrap the cloud
 Of infancy around us, that thyself,
 Therein, with our simplicity awhile
 Might'st hold, on earth, communion undisturbed;
 Who from the anarchy of dreaming sleep,
 Or from its death-like void, with punctual care,
 And touch as gentle as the morning light,
 Restor'st us, daily, to the powers of sense
 And reason's stedfast rule thou, thou alone
 Art everlasting, and the blessed Spirits,
 Which thou includest, as the sea her waves:
 For adoration thou endur'st; endure
 For consciousness the motions of thy will;
 For apprehension those transcendent truths
 Of the pure intellect, that stand as laws
 (Submission constituting strength and power)
 Even to thy Being's infinite majesty!
 This universe shall pass away a work
 Glorious! because the shadow of thy might,
 A step, or link, for intercourse with thee.
 Ah! if the time must come, in which my feet
 No more shall stray where meditation leads,
 By flowing stream, through wood, or craggy wild,
 Loved haunts like these; the unimprisoned Mind
 May yet have scope to range among her own,
 Her thoughts, her images, her high desires.
 If the dear faculty of sight should fail,
 Still, it may be allowed me to remember
 What visionary powers of eye and soul
 In youth were mine; when, stationed on the top
 Of some huge hill expectant, I beheld
 The sun rise up, from distant climes returned
 Darkness to chase, and sleep; and bring the day
 His bounteous gift! or saw him toward the deep
 Sink, with a retinue of flaming clouds
 Attended; then, my spirit was entranced
 With joy exalted to beatitude;
 The measure of my soul was filled with bliss,
 And holiest love; as earth, sea, air, with light,
 With pomp, with glory, with magnificence!

 Those fervent raptures are for ever flown;
 And, since their date, my soul hath undergone
 Change manifold, for better or for worse:
 Yet cease I not to struggle, and aspire
 Heavenward; and chide the part of me that flags,
 Through sinful choice; or dread necessity
 On human nature from above imposed.
 'Tis, by comparison, an easy task&lt;&lt;130
 Earth to despise; but, to converse with heaven
 This is not easy: to relinquish all
 We have, or hope, of happiness and joy,
 And stand in freedom loosened from this world,
 I deem not arduous; but must needs confess
 That 'tis a thing impossible to frame
 Conceptions equal to the soul's desires;
 And the most difficult of tasks to 'keep'
 Heights which the soul is competent to gain.
 Man is of dust: ethereal hopes are his,
 Which, when they should sustain themselves aloft,
 Want due consistence; like a pillar of smoke,
 That with majestic energy from earth
 Rises; but, having reached the thinner air,
 Melts, and dissolves, and is no longer seen.
 From this infirmity of mortal kind
 Sorrow proceeds, which else were not; at least,
 If grief be something hallowed and ordained,
 If, in proportion, it be just and meet,
 Yet, through this weakness of the general heart,
 Is it enabled to maintain its hold
 In that excess which conscience disapproves.
 For who could sink and settle to that point
 Of selfishness; so senseless who could be
 As long and perseveringly to mourn
 For any object of his love, removed
 From this unstable world, if he could fix
 A satisfying view upon that state
 Of pure, imperishable, blessedness,
 Which reason promises, and holy writ
 Ensures to all believers? Yet mistrust
 Is of such incapacity, methinks,
 No natural branch; despondency far less;
 And, least of all, is absolute despair.
 And, if there be whose tender frames have drooped
 Even to the dust; apparently, through weight
 Of anguish unrelieved, and lack of power
 An agonizing sorrow to transmute;
 Deem not that proof is here of hope withheld
 When wanted most; a confidence impaired
 So pitiably, that, having ceased to see
 With bodily eyes, they are borne down by love
 Of what is lost, and perish through regret.
 Oh! no, the innocent Sufferer often sees
 Too clearly; feels too vividly; and longs
 To realize the vision, with intense
 And over-constant yearning, there there lies
 The excess, by which the balance is destroyed.
 Too, too contracted are these walls of flesh,
 This vital warmth too cold, these visual orbs,
 Though inconceivably endowed, too dim
 For any passion of the soul that leads
 To ecstasy; and, all the crooked paths
 Of time and change disdaining, takes its course
 Along the line of limitless desires.
 I, speaking now from such disorder free,
 Nor rapt, nor craving, but in settled peace,
 I cannot doubt that they whom you deplore
 Are glorified; or, if they sleep, shall wake
 From sleep, and dwell with God in endless love.
 Hope, below this, consists not with belief
 In mercy, carried infinite degrees
 Beyond the tenderness of human hearts:
 Hope, below this, consists not with belief
 In perfect wisdom, guiding mightiest power,
 That finds no limits but her own pure will.

 Here then we rest; not fearing for our creed
 The worst that human reasoning can achieve,
 To unsettle or perplex it: yet with pain
 Acknowledging, and grievous self-reproach,
 That, though immovably convinced, we want
 Zeal, and the virtue to exist by faith
 As soldiers live by courage; as, by strength
 Of heart, the sailor fights with roaring seas.
 Alas! the endowment of immortal power &lt;&lt;205
 Is matched unequally with custom, time,
 And domineering faculties of sense
 In 'all'; in most, with superadded foes,
 Idle temptations; open vanities,
 Ephemeral offspring of the unblushing world;
 And, in the private regions of the mind,
 Ill-governed passions, ranklings of despite,
 Immoderate wishes, pining discontent,
 Distress and care. What then remains? To seek
 Those helps for his occasions ever near
 Who lacks not will to use them; vows, renewed
 On the first motion of a holy thought;
 Vigils of contemplation; praise; and prayer
 A stream, which, from the fountain of the heart
 Issuing, however feebly, nowhere flows
 Without access of unexpected strength.
 But, above all, the victory is most sure
 For him, who, seeking faith by virtue, strives
 To yield entire submission to the law
 Of conscience conscience reverenced and obeyed,
 As God's most intimate presence in the soul,
 And his most perfect image in the world.
 Endeavour thus to live; these rules regard;
 These helps solicit; and a stedfast seat
 Shall then be yours among the happy few
 Who dwell on earth, yet breathe empyreal air
 Sons of the morning. For your nobler part,
 Ere disencumbered of her mortal chains,
 Doubt shall be quelled and trouble chased away;
 With only such degree of sadness left
 As may support longings of pure desire;
 And strengthen love, rejoicing secretly
 In the sublime attractions of the grave."

 While, in this strain, the venerable Sage
 Poured forth his aspirations, and announced
 His judgments, near that lonely house we paced
 A plot of greensward, seemingly preserved
 By nature's care from wreck of scattered stones,
 And from encroachment of encircling heath:
 Small space! but, for reiterated steps,
 Smooth and commodious; as a stately deck
 Which to and fro the mariner is used
 To tread for pastime, talking with his mates,
 Or haply thinking of far-distant friends,
 While the ship glides before a steady breeze.
 Stillness prevailed around us: and the voice
 That spake was capable to lift the soul
 Toward regions yet more tranquil. But, methought,
 That he, whose fixed despondency had given
 Impulse and motive to that strong discourse,
 Was less upraised in spirit than abashed;
 Shrinking from admonition, like a man
 Who feels that to exhort is to reproach.
 Yet not to be diverted from his aim,
 The Sage continued:
 "For that other loss,
 The loss of confidence in social man,
 By the unexpected transports of our age
 Carried so high, that every thought, which looked
 Beyond the temporal destiny of the Kind,
 To many seemed superfluous as, no cause
 Could e'er for such exalted confidence
 Exist; so, none is now for fixed despair:
 The two extremes are equally disowned
 By reason: if, with sharp recoil, from one
 You have been driven far as its opposite,
 Between them seek the point whereon to build
 Sound expectations. So doth he advise
 Who shared at first the illusion; but was soon
 Cast from the pedestal of pride by shocks
 Which Nature gently gave, in woods and fields;
 Nor unreproved by Providence, thus speaking
 To the inattentive children of the world:
 'Vainglorious Generation! what new powers
 'On you have been conferred? what gifts, withheld
 'From your progenitors, have ye received,
 'Fit recompense of new desert? what claim
 'Are ye prepared to urge, that my decrees
 'For you should undergo a sudden change;
 'And the weak functions of one busy day,
 'Reclaiming and extirpating, perform
 'What all the slowly-moving years of time,
 'With their united force, have left undone?
 'By nature's gradual processes be taught;
 'By story be confounded! Ye aspire
 'Rashly, to fall once more; and that false fruit,
 'Which, to your overweening spirits, yields
 'Hope of a flight celestial, will produce
 'Misery and shame. But Wisdom of her sons
 'Shall not the less, though late, be justified.'

 Such timely warning," said the Wanderer, "gave
 That visionary voice; and, at this day,
 When a Tartarean darkness overspreads
 The groaning nations; when the impious rule,
 By will or by established ordinance,
 Their own dire agents, and constrain the good
 To acts which they abhor; though I bewail
 This triumph, yet the pity of my heart
 Prevents me not from owning, that the law,
 By which mankind now suffers, is most just.
 For by superior energies; more strict
 Affiance in each other; faith more firm
 In their unhallowed principles; the bad
 Have fairly earned a victory o'er the weak,
 The vacillating, inconsistent good.
 Therefore, not unconsoled, I wait in hope
 To see the moment, when the righteous cause
 Shall gain defenders zealous and devout
 As they who have opposed her; in which Virtue
 Will, to her efforts, tolerate no bounds
 That are not lofty as her rights; aspiring
 By impulse of her own ethereal zeal.
 That spirit only can redeem mankind;
 And when that sacred spirit shall appear,
 Then shall 'four' triumph be complete as theirs.
 Yet, should this confidence prove vain, the wise
 Have still the keeping of their proper peace;
 Are guardians of their own tranquillity.
 They act, or they recede, observe, and feel;
 'Knowing the heart of man is set to be &lt;&lt;324
 The centre of this world, about the which
 Those revolutions of disturbances
 Still roll; where all the aspects of misery
 Predominate; whose strong effects are such
 As he must bear, being powerless to redress;
 "And that unless above himself he can
 Erect himself, how poor a thing is Man!"'

 Happy is he who lives to understand,
 Not human nature only, but explores
 All natures, to the end that he may find
 The law that governs each; and where begins
 The union, the partition where, that makes
 Kind and degree, among all visible Beings;
 The constitutions, powers, and faculties,
 Which they inherit, cannot step beyond,
 And cannot fall beneath; that do assign
 To every class its station and its office,
 Through all the mighty commonwealth of things
 Up from the creeping plant to sovereign Man.
 Such converse, if directed by a meek,
 Sincere, and humble spirit, teaches love:
 For knowledge is delight; and such delight
 Breeds love: yet, suited as it rather is
 To thought and to the climbing intellect,
 It teaches less to love, than to adore;
 If that be not indeed the highest love!"

 "Yet," said I, tempted here to interpose,
 "The dignity of life is not impaired
 By aught that innocently satisfies
 The humbler cravings of the heart; and he
 Is a still happier man, who, for those heights
 Of speculation not unfit, descends;
 And such benign affections cultivates
 Among the inferior kinds; not merely those
 That he may call his own, and which depend,
 As individual objects of regard,
 Upon his care, from whom he also looks
 For signs and tokens of a mutual bond;
 But others, far beyond this narrow sphere,
 Whom, for the very sake of love, he loves.
 Nor is it a mean praise of rural life
 And solitude, that they do favour most,
 Most frequently call forth, and best sustain,
 These pure sensations; that can penetrate
 The obstreperous city; on the barren seas
 Are not unfelt; and much might recommend,
 How much they might inspirit and endear,
 The loneliness of this sublime retreat!"

 "Yes," said the Sage, resuming the discourse
 Again directed to his downcast Friend,
 "If, with the froward will and grovelling soul
 Of man, offended, liberty is here,
 And invitation every hour renewed,
 To mark 'their' placid state, who never heard
 Of a command which they have power to break,
 Or rule which they are tempted to transgress:
 These, with a soothed or elevated heart,
 May we behold; their knowledge register;
 Observe their ways; and, free from envy, find
 Complacence there: but wherefore this to you?
 I guess that, welcome to your lonely hearth,
 The redbreast, ruffled up by winter's cold
 Into a 'feathery bunch,' feeds at your hand:
 A box, perchance, is from your casement hung
 For the small wren to build in; not in vain,
 The barriers disregarding that surround
 This deep abiding place, before your sight
 Mounts on the breeze the butterfly; and soars,
 Small creature as she is, from earth's bright flowers,
 Into the dewy clouds. Ambition reigns
 In the waste wilderness: the Soul ascends
 Drawn towards her native firmament of heaven,
 When the fresh eagle, in the month of May,
 Upborne, at evening, on replenished wing,
 This shaded valley leaves; and leaves the dark
 Empurpled hills, conspicuously renewing
 A proud communication with the sun
 Low sunk beneath the horizon! List! I heard,
 From yon huge breast of rock, a voice sent forth
 As if the visible mountain made the cry.
 Again!" The effect upon the soul was such
 As he expressed: from out the mountain's heart
 The solemn voice appeared to issue, startling
 The blank air for the region all around
 Stood empty of all shape of life, and silent
 Save for that single cry, the unanswered bleat
 Of a poor lamb left somewhere to itself,
 The plaintive spirit of the solitude!
 He paused, as if unwilling to proceed,
 Through consciousness that silence in such place
 Was best, the most affecting eloquence.
 But soon his thoughts returned upon themselves,
 And, in soft tone of speech, thus he resumed.

 "Ah! if the heart, too confidently raised,
 Perchance too lightly occupied, or lulled
 Too easily, despise or overlook
 The vassalage that binds her to the earth,
 Her sad dependence upon time, and all
 The trepidations of mortality,
 What place so destitute and void but there
 The little flower her vanity shall check;
 The trailing worm reprove her thoughtless pride?

 These craggy regions, these chaotic wilds,
 Does that benignity pervade, that warms
 The mole contented with her darksome walk
 In the cold ground; and to the emmet gives
 Her foresight, and intelligence that makes
 The tiny creatures strong by social league;
 Supports the generations, multiplies
 Their tribes, till we behold a spacious plain
 Or grassy bottom, all, with little hills
 Their labour, covered, as a lake with waves;
 Thousands of cities, in the desert place
 Built up of life, and food, and means of life!
 Nor wanting here, to entertain the thought,
 Creatures that in communities exist,
 Less, as might seem, for general guardianship
 Or through dependence upon mutual aid,
 Than by participation of delight
 And a strict love of fellowship, combined.
 What other spirit can it be that prompts
 The gilded summer flies to mix and weave
 Their sports together in the solar beam,
 Or in the gloom of twilight hum their joy?
 More obviously the self-same influence rules
 The feathered kinds; the fieldfare's pensive flock,
 The cawing rooks, and sea-mews from afar,
 Hovering above these inland solitudes,
 By the rough wind unscattered, at whose call
 Up through the trenches of the long-drawn vales
 Their voyage was begun: nor is its power
 Unfelt among the sedentary fowl
 That seek yon pool, and there prolong their stay
 In silent congress; or together roused
 Take flight; while with their clang the air resounds:
 And, over all, in that ethereal vault,
 Is the mute company of changeful clouds;
 Bright apparition, suddenly put forth,
 The rainbow smiling on the faded storm;
 The mild assemblage of the starry heavens;
 And the great sun, earth's universal lord!

 How bountiful is Nature! he shall find
 Who seeks not; and to him, who hath not asked,
 Large measure shall be dealt. Three sabbath-days
 Are scarcely told, since, on a service bent
 Of mere humanity, you clomb those heights;
 And what a marvellous and heavenly show
 Was suddenly revealed! the swains moved on,
 And heeded not: you lingered, you perceived
 And felt, deeply as living man could feel.
 There is a luxury in self-dispraise;
 And inward self-disparagement affords
 To meditative spleen a grateful feast.
 Trust me, pronouncing on your own desert,
 You judge unthankfully: distempered nerves
 Infect the thoughts: the languor of the frame
 Depresses the soul's vigour. Quit your couch
 Cleave not so fondly to your moody cell;
 Nor let the hallowed powers, that shed from heaven
 Stillness and rest, with disapproving eye
 Look down upon your taper, through a watch
 Of midnight hours, unseasonably twinkling
 In this deep Hollow, like a sullen star
 Dimly reflected in a lonely pool.
 Take courage, and withdraw yourself from ways
 That run not parallel to nature's course.
 Rise with the lark! your matins shall obtain
 Grace, be their composition what it may,
 If but with hers performed; climb once again,
 Climb every day, those ramparts; meet the breeze
 Upon their tops, adventurous as a bee
 That from your garden thither soars, to feed
 On new-blown heath; let yon commanding rock
 Be your frequented watch-tower; roll the stone
 In thunder down the mountains; with all your might
 Chase the wild goat; and if the bold red deer
 Fly to those harbours, driven by hound and horn
 Loud echoing, add your speed to the pursuit;
 So, wearied to your hut shall you return,
 And sink at evening into sound repose."

 The Solitary lifted toward the hills
 A kindling eye: accordant feelings rushed
 Into my bosom, whence these words broke forth:
 "Oh! what a joy it were, in vigorous health,
 To have a body (this our vital frame
 With shrinking sensibility endued,
 And all the nice regards of flesh and blood)
 And to the elements surrender it
 As if it were a spirit! How divine,
 The liberty, for frail, for mortal, man
 To roam at large among unpeopled glens
 And mountainous retirements, only trod
 By devious footsteps; regions consecrate
 To oldest time! and, reckless of the storm
 That keeps the raven quiet in her nest,
 Be as a presence or a motion one
 Among the many there; and while the mists
 Flying, and rainy vapours, call out shapes
 And phantoms from the crags and solid earth
 As fast as a musician scatters sounds
 Out of an instrument; and while the streams
 (As at a first creation and in haste
 To exercise their untried faculties)
 Descending from the region of the clouds,
 And starting from the hollows of the earth
 More multitudinous every moment, rend
 Their way before them what a joy to roam
 An equal among mightiest energies;
 And haply sometimes with articulate voice,
 Amid the deafening tumult, scarcely heard
 By him that utters it, exclaim aloud,
 'Rage on ye elements! let moon and stars
 Their aspects lend, and mingle in their turn
 With this commotion (ruinous though it be)
 From day to night, from night to day, prolonged!'"

 "Yes," said the Wanderer, taking from my lips
 The strain of transport, "whosoe'er in youth
 Has, through ambition of his soul, given way
 To such desires, and grasped at such delight,
 Shall feel congenial stirrings late and long,
 In spite of all the weakness that life brings,
 Its cares and sorrows; he, though taught to own
 The tranquillizing power of time, shall wake,
 Wake sometimes to a noble restlessness
 Loving the sports which once he gloried in.

 Compatriot, Friend, remote are Garry's hills,
 The streams far distant of your native glen;
 Yet is their form and image here expressed
 With brotherly resemblance. Turn your steps
 Wherever fancy leads; by day, by night,
 Are various engines working, not the same
 As those with which your soul in youth was moved,
 But by the great Artificer endowed
 With no inferior power. You dwell alone;
 You walk, you live, you speculate alone;
 Yet doth remembrance, like a sovereign prince,
 For you a stately gallery maintain
 Of gay or tragic pictures. You have seen,
 Have acted, suffered, travelled far, observed
 With no incurious eye; and books are yours,
 Within whose silent chambers treasure lies
 Preserved from age to age; more precious far
 Than that accumulated store of gold
 And orient gems, which, for a day of need,
 The Sultan hides deep in ancestral tombs.
 These hoards of truth you can unlock at will:
 And music waits upon your skilful touch,
 Sounds which the wandering shepherd from these heights
 Hears, and forgets his purpose; furnished thus,
 How can you droop, if willing to be upraised?

 A piteous lot it were to flee from Man
 Yet not rejoice in Nature. He, whose hours
 Are by domestic pleasures uncaressed
 And unenlivened; who exists whole years
 Apart from benefits received or done
 'Mid the transactions of the bustling crowd;
 Who neither hears, nor feels a wish to hear,
 Of the world's interests such a one hath need
 Of a quick fancy, and an active heart,
 That, for the day's consumption, books may yield
 Food not unwholesome; earth and air correct
 His morbid humour, with delight supplied
 Or solace, varying as the seasons change.
 Truth has her pleasure-grounds, her haunts of ease
 And easy contemplation; gay parterres,
 And labyrinthine walks, her sunny glades
 And shady groves in studied contrast each,
 For recreation, leading into each:
 These may he range, if willing to partake
 Their soft indulgences, and in due time
 May issue thence, recruited for the tasks
 And course of service Truth requires from those
 Who tend her altars, wait upon her throne,
 And guard her fortresses. Who thinks, and feels,
 And recognises ever and anon
 The breeze of nature stirring in his soul,
 Why need such man go desperately astray,
 And nurse 'the dreadful appetite of death?'
 If tired with systems, each in its degree
 Substantial, and all crumbling in their turn,
 Let him build systems of his own, and smile
 At the fond work, demolished with a touch;
 If unreligious, let him be at once,
 Among ten thousand innocents, enrolled
 A pupil in the many-chambered school,
 Where superstition weaves her airy dreams.

 Life's autumn past, I stand on winter's verge;
 And daily lose what I desire to keep:
 Yet rather would I instantly decline
 To the traditionary sympathies
 Of a most rustic ignorance, and take
 A fearful apprehension from the owl
 Or death-watch: and as readily rejoice,
 If two auspicious magpies crossed my way;
 To this would rather bend than see and hear
 The repetitions wearisome of sense,
 Where soul is dead, and feeling hath no place;
 Where knowledge, ill begun in cold remark
 On outward things, with formal inference ends;
 Or, if the mind turn inward, she recoils
 At once or, not recoiling, is perplexed
 Lost in a gloom of uninspired research;
 Meanwhile, the heart within the heart, the seat
 Where peace and happy consciousness should dwell,
 On its own axis restlessly revolving,
 Seeks, yet can nowhere find, the light of truth.

 Upon the breast of new-created earth
 Man walked; and when and wheresoe'er he moved,
 Alone or mated, solitude was not.
 He heard, borne on the wind, the articulate voice
 Of God; and Angels to his sight appeared
 Crowning the glorious hills of paradise;
 Or through the groves gliding like morning mist
 Enkindled by the sun. He sate and talked
 With winged Messengers; who daily brought
 To his small island in the ethereal deep
 Tidings of joy and love. From those pure heights
 (Whether of actual vision, sensible
 To sight and feeling, or that in this sort
 Have condescendingly been shadowed forth
 Communications spiritually maintained,
 And intuitions moral and divine)
 Fell Human-kind to banishment condemned
 That flowing years repealed not: and distress
 And grief spread wide; but Man escaped the doom
 Of destitution; solitude was not.
 Jehovah shapeless Power above all Powers,
 Single and one, the omnipresent God,
 By vocal utterance, or blaze of light,
 Or cloud of darkness, localised in heaven;
 On earth, enshrined within the wandering ark;
 Or, out of Sion, thundering from his throne
 Between the Cherubim on the chosen Race
 Showered miracles, and ceased not to dispense
 Judgments, that filled the land from age to age
 With hope, and love, and gratitude, and fear;
 And with amazement smote; thereby to assert
 His scorned, or unacknowledged, sovereignty.
 And when the One, ineffable of name,
 Of nature indivisible, withdrew
 From mortal adoration or regard,
 Not then was Deity engulphed; nor Man,
 The rational creature, left, to feel the weight
 Of his own reason, without sense or thought
 Of higher reason and a purer will,
 To benefit and bless, through mightier power:
 Whether the Persian zealous to reject
 Altar and image, and the inclusive walls
 And roofs of temples built by human hands
 To loftiest heights ascending, from their tops,
 With myrtle-wreathed tiara on his brow,
 Presented sacrifice to moon and stars,
 And to the winds and mother elements,
 And the whole circle of the heavens, for him
 A sensitive existence, and a God,
 With lifted hands invoked, and songs of praise:
 Or, less reluctantly to bonds of sense
 Yielding his soul, the Babylonian framed
 For influence undefined a personal shape;
 And, from the plain, with toil immense, upreared
 Tower eight times planted on the top of tower,
 That Belus, nightly to his splendid couch
 Descending, there might rest; upon that height
 Pure and serene, diffused to overlook
 Winding Euphrates, and the city vast
 Of his devoted worshippers, far-stretched,
 With grove and field and garden interspersed;
 Their town, and foodful region for support
 Against the pressure of beleaguering war.

 Chaldean Shepherds, ranging trackless fields,
 Beneath the concave of unclouded skies
 Spread like a sea, in boundless solitude,
 Looked on the polar star, as on a guide
 And guardian of their course, that never closed
 His stedfast eye. The planetary Five
 With a submissive reverence they beheld;
 Watched, from the centre of their sleeping flocks,
 Those radiant Mercuries, that seemed to move
 Carrying through ether, in perpetual round,
 Decrees and resolutions of the Gods;
 And, by their aspects, signifying works
 Of dim futurity, to Man revealed.
 The imaginative faculty was lord
 Of observations natural; and, thus
 Led on, those shepherds made report of stars
 In set rotation passing to and fro,
 Between the orbs of our apparent sphere
 And its invisible counterpart, adorned
 With answering constellations, under earth,
 Removed from all approach of living sight
 But present to the dead; who, so they deemed,
 Like those celestial messengers beheld
 All accidents, and judges were of all.

 The lively Grecian, in a land of hills,
 Rivers and fertile plains, and sounding shores,
 Under a cope of sky more variable,
 Could find commodious place for every God,
 Promptly received, as prodigally brought,
 From the surrounding countries, at the choice
 Of all adventurers. With unrivalled skill,
 As nicest observation furnished hints
 For studious fancy, his quick hand bestowed
 On fluent operations a fixed shape;
 Metal or stone, idolatrously served.
 And yet triumphant o'er this pompous show
 Of art, this palpable array of sense,
 On every side encountered; in despite
 Of the gross fictions chanted in the streets
 By wandering Rhapsodists; and in contempt
 Of doubt and bold denial hourly urged
 Amid the wrangling schools a SPIRIT hung,
 Beautiful region! o'er thy towns and farms,
 Statues and temples, and memorial tombs;
 And emanations were perceived; and acts
 Of immortality, in Nature's course,
 Exemplified by mysteries, that were felt
 As bonds, on grave philosopher imposed
 And armed warrior; and in every grove
 A gay or pensive tenderness prevailed,
 When piety more awful had relaxed.
 'Take, running river, take these locks of mine'
 Thus would the Votary say 'this severed hair,
 'My vow fulfilling, do I here present,
 'Thankful for my beloved child's return.
 'Thy banks, Cephisus, he again hath trod,
 'Thy murmurs heard; and drunk the crystal lymph
 'With which thou dost refresh the thirsty lip,
 'And, all day long, moisten these flowery fields!'
 And doubtless, sometimes, when the hair was shed
 Upon the flowing stream, a thought arose
 Of Life continuous, Being unimpaired;
 That hath been, is, and where it was and is
 There shall endure, existence unexposed
 To the blind walk of mortal accident;
 From diminution safe and weakening age;
 While man grows old, and dwindles, and decays;
 And countless generations of mankind
 Depart; and leave no vestige where they trod.

 We live by Admiration, Hope and Love;
 And, even as these are well and wisely fixed,
 In dignity of being we ascend.
 But what is error?" "Answer he who can!"
 The Sceptic somewhat haughtily exclaimed:
 "Love, Hope, and Admiration, are they not
 Mad Fancy's favourite vassals? Does not life
 Use them, full oft, as pioneers to ruin,
 Guides to destruction? Is it well to trust
 Imagination's light when reason's fails,
 The unguarded taper where the guarded faints?
 Stoop from those heights, and soberly declare
 What error is; and, of our errors, which
 Doth most debase the mind; the genuine seats
 Of power, where are they? Who shall regulate,
 With truth, the scale of intellectual rank?"

 "Methinks," persuasively the Sage replied,
 "That for this arduous office you possess
 Some rare advantages. Your early days
 A grateful recollection must supply
 Of much exalted good by Heaven vouchsafed
 To dignify the humblest state. Your voice
 Hath, in my hearing, often testified
 That poor men's children, they, and they alone,
 By their condition taught, can understand
 The wisdom of the prayer that daily asks
 For daily bread. A consciousness is yours
 How feelingly religion may be learned
 In smoky cabins, from a mother's tongue
 Heard where the dwelling vibrates to the din
 Of the contiguous torrent, gathering strength
 At every moment and, with strength, increase
 Of fury; or, while snow is at the door,
 Assaulting and defending, and the wind,
 A sightless labourer, whistles at his work
 Fearful; but resignation tempers fear,
 And piety is sweet to infant minds.
 The Shepherd-lad, that in the sunshine carves,
 On the green turf, a dial to divide
 The silent hours; and who to that report
 Can portion out his pleasures, and adapt,
 Throughout a long and lonely summer's day
 His round of pastoral duties, is not left
 With less intelligence for 'moral' things
 Of gravest import. Early he perceives,
 Within himself, a measure and a rule,
 Which to the sun of truth he can apply,
 That shines for him, and shines for all mankind.
 Experience daily fixing his regards
 On nature's wants, he knows how few they are,
 And where they lie, how answered and appeased.
 This knowledge ample recompense affords
 For manifold privations; he refers
 His notions to this standard; on this rock
 Rests his desires; and hence, in after life,
 Soul-strengthening patience, and sublime content.
 Imagination not permitted here
 To waste her powers, as in the worldling's mind,
 On fickle pleasures, and superfluous cares,
 And trivial ostentation is left free
 And puissant to range the solemn walks
 Of time and nature, girded by a zone
 That, while it binds, invigorates and supports.
 Acknowledge, then, that whether by the side
 Of his poor hut, or on the mountain top,
 Or in the cultured field, a Man so bred
 (Take from him what you will upon the score
 Of ignorance or illusion) lives and breathes
 For noble purposes of mind: his heart
 Beats to the heroic song of ancient days;
 His eye distinguishes, his soul creates.
 And those illusions, which excite the scorn
 Or move the pity of unthinking minds,
 Are they not mainly outward ministers
 Of inward conscience? with whose service charged
 They came and go, appeared and disappear,
 Diverting evil purposes, remorse
 Awakening, chastening an intemperate grief,
 Or pride of heart abating: and, whene'er
 For less important ends those phantoms move,
 Who would forbid them, if their presence serve
 On thinly-peopled mountains and wild heaths,
 Filling a space, else vacant to exalt
 The forms of Nature, and enlarge her powers?

 Once more to distant ages of the world
 Let us revert, and place before our thoughts
 The face which rural solitude might wear
 To the unenlightened swains of pagan Greece.
 In that fair clime, the lonely herdsman, stretched
 On the soft grass through half a summer's day,
 With music lulled his indolent repose:
 And, in some fit of weariness, if he,
 When his own breath was silent, chanced to hear
 A distant strain, far sweeter than the sounds
 Which his poor skill could make, his fancy fetched,
 Even from the blazing chariot of the sun,
 A beardless Youth, who touched a golden lute,
 And filled the illumined groves with ravishment.
 The nightly hunter, lifting a bright eye
 Up towards the crescent moon, with grateful heart
 Called on the lovely wanderer who bestowed
 That timely light, to share his joyous sport:
 And hence, a beaming Goddess with her Nymphs,
 Across the lawn and through the darksome grove,
 Not unaccompanied with tuneful notes
 By echo multiplied from rock or cave,
 Swept in the storm of chase; as moon and stars
 Glance rapidly along the clouded heaven,
 When winds are blowing strong. The traveller slaked
 His thirst from rill or gushing fount, and thanked
 The Naiad. Sunbeams, upon distant hills
 Gliding apace, with shadows in their train,
 Might, with small help from fancy, be transformed
 Into fleet Oreads sporting visibly.
 The Zephyrs fanning, as they passed, their wings,
 Lacked not, for love, fair objects whom they wooed
 With gentle whisper. Withered boughs grotesque,
 Stripped of their leaves and twigs by hoary age,
 From depth of shaggy covert peeping forth
 In the low vale, or on steep mountain side;
 And, sometimes, intermixed with stirring horns
 Of the live deer, or goat's depending beard,
 These were the lurking Satyrs, a wild brood
 Of gamesome Deities; or Pan himself,
 The simple shepherd's awe-inspiring God!"

 The strain was aptly chosen; and I could mark
 Its kindly influence, o'er the yielding brow
 Of our Companion, gradually diffused;
 While, listening, he had paced the noiseless turf,
 Like one whose untired ear a murmuring stream
 Detains; but tempted now to interpose,
 He with a smile exclaimed:
 "'Tis well you speak
 At a safe distance from our native land,
 And from the mansions where our youth was taught.
 The true descendants of those godly men
 Who swept from Scotland, in a flame of zeal,
 Shrine, altar, image, and the massy piles
 That harboured them, the souls retaining yet
 The churlish features of that after-race
 Who fled to woods, caverns, and jutting rocks,
 In deadly scorn of superstitious rites,
 Or what their scruples construed to be such
 How, think you, would they tolerate this scheme
 Of fine propensities, that tends, if urged
 Far as it might be urged, to sow afresh
 The weeds of Romish phantasy, in vain
 Uprooted; would re-consecrate our wells
 To good Saint Fillan and to fair Saint Anne;
 And from long banishment recall Saint Giles,
 To watch again with tutelary love
 O'er stately Edinborough throned on crags?
 A blessed restoration, to behold
 The patron, on the shoulders of his priests,
 Once more parading through her crowded streets,
 Now simply guarded by the sober powers
 Of science, and philosophy, and sense!"

 This answer followed. "You have turned my thoughts
 Upon our brave Progenitors, who rose
 Against idolatry with warlike mind,
 And shrunk from vain observances, to lurk
 In woods, and dwell under impending rocks
 Ill-sheltered, and oft wanting fire and food;
 Why? for this very reason that they felt,
 And did acknowledge, wheresoe'er they moved,
 A spiritual presence, oft-times misconceived,
 But still a high dependence, a divine
 Bounty and government, that filled their hearts
 With joy, and gratitude, and fear, and love;
 And from their fervent lips drew hymns of praise,
 That through the desert rang. Though favoured less,
 Far less, than these, yet such, in their degree,
 Were those bewildered Pagans of old time.
 Beyond their own poor natures and above
 They looked; were humbly thankful for the good
 Which the warm sun solicited, and earth
 Bestowed; were gladsome, and their moral sense
 They fortified with reverence for the Gods;
 And they had hopes that overstepped the Grave.

 Now, shall our great Discoverers," he exclaimed,
 Raising his voice triumphantly, "obtain
 From sense and reason, less than these obtained,
 Though far misled? Shall men for whom our age
 Unbaffled powers of vision hath prepared,
 To explore the world without and world within,
 Be joyless as the blind? Ambitious spirits
 Whom earth, at this late season, hath produced
 To regulate the moving spheres, and weigh
 The planets in the hollow of their hand;
 And they who rather dive than soar, whose pains
 Have solved the elements, or analysed
 The thinking principle shall they in fact
 Prove a degraded Race? and what avails
 Renown, if their presumption make them such?
 Oh! there is laughter at their work in heaven!
 Inquire of ancient Wisdom; go, demand
 Of mighty Nature, if 'twas ever meant
 That we should pry far off yet be unraised;
 That we should pore, and dwindle as we pore,
 Viewing all objects unremittingly
 In disconnection dead and spiritless;
 And still dividing, and dividing still,
 Break down all grandeur, still unsatisfied
 With the perverse attempt, while littleness
 May yet become more little; waging thus
 An impious warfare with the very life
 Of our own souls!
 And if indeed there be
 An all-pervading Spirit, upon whom
 Our dark foundations rest, could he design
 That this magnificent effect of power,
 The earth we tread, the sky that we behold
 By day, and all the pomp which night reveals;
 That these and that superior mystery
 Our vital frame, so fearfully devised,
 And the dread soul within it should exist
 Only to be examined, pondered, searched,
 Probed, vexed, and criticised? Accuse me not
 Of arrogance, unknown Wanderer as I am,
 If, having walked with Nature threescore years,
 And offered, far as frailty would allow,
 My heart a daily sacrifice to Truth,
 I now affirm of Nature and of Truth,
 Whom I have served, that their DIVINITY
 Revolts, offended at the ways of men
 Swayed by such motives, to such ends employed;
 Philosophers, who, though the human soul
 Be of a thousand faculties composed,
 And twice ten thousand interests, do yet prize
 This soul, and the transcendent universe,
 No more than as a mirror that reflects
 To proud Self-love her own intelligence;
 That one, poor, finite object, in the abyss
 Of infinite Being, twinkling restlessly!

 Nor higher place can be assigned to him
 And his compeers the laughing Sage of France.
 Crowned was he, if my memory do not err,
 With laurel planted upon hoary hairs,
 In sign of conquest by his wit achieved
 And benefits his wisdom had conferred;
 His stooping body tottered with wreaths of flowers
 Opprest, far less becoming ornaments
 Than Spring oft twines about a mouldering tree;
 Yet so it pleased a fond, a vain, old Man,
 And a most frivolous people. Him I mean
 Who penned, to ridicule confiding faith,
 This sorry Legend; which by chance we found
 Piled in a nook, through malice, as might seem,
 Among more innocent rubbish." Speaking thus,
 With a brief notice when, and how, and where,
 We had espied the book, he drew it forth;
 And courteously, as if the act removed,
 At once, all traces from the good Man's heart
 Of unbenign aversion or contempt,
 Restored it to its owner. "Gentle Friend,"
 Herewith he grasped the Solitary's hand,
 "You have known lights and guides better than these.
 Ah! let not aught amiss within dispose
 A noble mind to practise on herself,
 And tempt opinion to support the wrongs
 Of passion: whatsoe'er be felt or feared,
 From higher judgment-seats make no appeal
 To lower: can you question that the soul
 Inherits an allegiance, not by choice
 To be cast off, upon an oath proposed
 By each new upstart notion? In the ports
 Of levity no refuge can be found,
 No shelter, for a spirit in distress.
 He, who by wilful disesteem of life
 And proud insensibility to hope,
 Affronts the eye of Solitude, shall learn
 That her mild nature can be terrible;
 That neither she nor Silence lack the power
 To avenge their own insulted majesty.

 O blest seclusion! when the mind admits
 The law of duty; and can therefore move
 Through each vicissitude of loss and gain,
 Linked in entire complacence with her choice;
 When youth's presumptuousness is mellowed down,
 And manhood's vain anxiety dismissed;
 When wisdom shows her seasonable fruit,
 Upon the boughs of sheltering leisure hung
 In sober plenty; when the spirit stoops
 To drink with gratitude the crystal stream
 Of unreproved enjoyment; and is pleased
 To muse, and be saluted by the air
 Of meek repentance, wafting wall-flower scents
 From out the crumbling ruins of fallen pride
 And chambers of transgression, now forlorn.
 O, calm contented days, and peaceful nights!
 Who, when such good can be obtained, would strive
 To reconcile his manhood to a couch
 Soft, as may seem, but, under that disguise,
 Stuffed with the thorny substance of the past
 For fixed annoyance; and full oft beset
 With floating dreams, black and disconsolate,
 The vapoury phantoms of futurity?

 Within the soul a faculty abides,
 That with interpositions, which would hide
 And darken, so can deal that they become
 Contingencies of pomp; and serve to exalt
 Her native brightness. As the ample moon,
 In the deep stillness of a summer even
 Rising behind a thick and lofty grove,
 Burns, like an unconsuming fire of light,
 In the green trees; and, kindling on all sides
 Their leafy umbrage, turns the dusky veil
 Into a substance glorious as her own,
 Yea, with her own incorporated, by power
 Capacious and serene. Like power abides
 In man's celestial spirit; virtue thus
 Sets forth and magnifies herself; thus feeds
 A calm, a beautiful, and silent fire,
 From the encumbrances of mortal life,
 From error, disappointment nay, from guilt;
 And sometimes, so relenting justice wills,
 From palpable oppressions of despair."

 The Solitary by these words was touched
 With manifest emotion, and exclaimed;
 "But how begin? and whence? 'The Mind is free
 Resolve,' the haughty Moralist would say,
 'This single act is all that we demand.'
 Alas! such wisdom bids a creature fly
 Whose very sorrow is, that time hath shorn
 His natural wings! To friendship let him turn
 For succour, but perhaps he sits alone
 On stormy waters, tossed in a little boat
 That holds but him, and can contain no more!
 Religion tells of amity sublime
 Which no condition can preclude; of One
 Who sees all suffering, comprehends all wants,
 All weakness fathoms, can supply all needs:
 But is that bounty absolute? His gifts,
 Are they not, still, in some degree, rewards
 For acts of service? Can his love extend
 To hearts that own not him? Will showers of grace,
 When in the sky no promise may be seen,
 Fall to refresh a parched and withered land?
 Or shall the groaning Spirit cast her load
 At the Redeemer's feet?"
 In rueful tone,
 With some impatience in his mien, he spake:
 Back to my mind rushed all that had been urged
 To calm the Sufferer when his story closed;
 I looked for counsel as unbending now;
 But a discriminating sympathy
 Stooped to this apt reply:
 "As men from men
 Do, in the constitution of their souls,
 Differ, by mystery not to be explained;
 And as we fall by various ways, and sink
 One deeper than another, self-condemned,
 Through manifold degrees of guilt and shame;
 So manifold and various are the ways
 Of restoration, fashioned to the steps
 Of all infirmity, and tending all
 To the same point, attainable by all
 Peace in ourselves, and union with our God.
 For you, assuredly, a hopeful road
 Lies open: we have heard from you a voice
 At every moment softened in its course
 By tenderness of heart; have seen your eye,
 Even like an altar lit by fire from heaven,
 Kindle before us. Your discourse this day,
 That, like the fabled Lethe, wished to flow
 In creeping sadness, through oblivious shades
 Of death and night, has caught at every turn
 The colours of the sun. Access for you
 Is yet preserved to principles of truth,
 Which the imaginative Will upholds
 In seats of wisdom, not to be approached
 By the inferior Faculty that moulds,
 With her minute and speculative pains,
 Opinion, ever changing!
 I have seen
 A curious child, who dwelt upon a tract
 Of inland ground, applying to his ear
 The convolutions of a smooth-lipped shell;
 To which, in silence hushed, his very soul
 Listened intensely; and his countenance soon
 Brightened with joy; for from within were heard
 Murmurings, whereby the monitor expressed
 Mysterious union with its native sea.
 Even such a shell the universe itself
 Is to the ear of Faith; and there are times,
 I doubt not, when to you it doth impart
 Authentic tidings of invisible things;
 Of ebb and flow, and ever-during power;
 And central peace, subsisting at the heart
 Of endless agitation. Here you stand,
 Adore, and worship, when you know it not;
 Pious beyond the intention of your thought;
 Devout above the meaning of your will.
 Yes, you have felt, and may not cease to feel.
 The estate of man would be indeed forlorn
 If false conclusions of the reasoning power
 Made the eye blind, and closed the passages
 Through which the ear converses with the heart.
 Has not the soul, the being of your life,
 Received a shock of awful consciousness,
 In some calm season, when these lofty rocks
 At night's approach bring down the unclouded sky,
 To rest upon their circumambient walls;
 A temple framing of dimensions vast,
 And yet not too enormous for the sound
 Of human anthems, choral song, or burst
 Sublime of instrumental harmony,
 To glorify the Eternal! What if these
 Did never break the stillness that prevails
 Here, if the solemn nightingale be mute,
 And the soft woodlark here did never chant
 Her vespers, Nature fails not to provide
 Impulse and utterance. The whispering air
 Sends inspiration from the shadowy heights,
 And blind recesses of the caverned rocks;
 The little rills, and waters numberless,
 Inaudible by daylight, blend their notes
 With the loud streams: and often, at the hour
 When issue forth the first pale stars, is heard,
 Within the circuit of this fabric huge,
 One voice the solitary raven, flying
 Athwart the concave of the dark blue dome,
 Unseen, perchance above all power of sight
 An iron knell! with echoes from afar
 Faint and still fainter as the cry, with which
 The wanderer accompanies her flight
 Through the calm region, fades upon the ear,
 Diminishing by distance till it seemed
 To expire; yet from the abyss is caught again,
 And yet again recovered!
 But descending
 From these imaginative heights, that yield
 Far-stretching views into eternity,
 Acknowledge that to Nature's humbler power
 Your cherished sullenness is forced to bend
 Even here, where her amenities are sown
 With sparing hand. Then trust yourself abroad
 To range her blooming bowers, and spacious fields,
 Where on the labours of the happy throng
 She smiles, including in her wide embrace
 City, and town, and tower, and sea with ships
 Sprinkled; be our Companion while we track
 Her rivers populous with gliding life;
 While, free as air, o'er printless sands we march,
 Or pierce the gloom of her majestic woods;
 Roaming, or resting under grateful shade
 In peace and meditative cheerfulness;
 Where living things, and things inanimate,
 Do speak, at Heaven's command, to eye and ear,
 And speak to social reason's inner sense,
 With inarticulate language.
 For, the Man
 Who, in this spirit, communes with the Forms
 Of nature, who with understanding heart
 Both knows and loves such objects as excite
 No morbid passions, no disquietude,
 No vengeance, and no hatred needs must feel
 The joy of that pure principle of love
 So deeply, that, unsatisfied with aught
 Less pure and exquisite, he cannot choose
 But seek for objects of a kindred love
 In fellow-natures and a kindred joy.
 Accordingly he by degrees perceives
 His feelings of aversion softened down;
 A holy tenderness pervade his frame.
 His sanity of reason not impaired,
 Say rather, all his thoughts now flowing clear,
 From a clear fountain flowing, he looks round
 And seeks for good; and finds the good he seeks:
 Until abhorrence and contempt are things
 He only knows by name; and, if he hear,
 From other mouths, the language which they speak,
 He is compassionate; and has no thought,
 No feeling, which can overcome his love.

 And further; by contemplating these Forms
 In the relations which they bear to man,
 He shall discern, how, through the various means
 Which silently they yield, are multiplied
 The spiritual presences of absent things.
 Trust me, that for the instructed, time will come
 When they shall meet no object but may teach
 Some acceptable lesson to their minds
 Of human suffering, or of human joy.
 So shall they learn, while all things speak of man,
 Their duties from all forms; and general laws,
 And local accidents, shall tend alike
 To rouse, to urge; and, with the will, confer
 The ability to spread the blessings wide
 Of true philanthropy. The light of love
 Not failing, perseverance from their steps
 Departing not, for them shall be confirmed
 The glorious habit by which sense is made
 Subservient still to moral purposes,
 Auxiliar to divine. That change shall clothe
 The naked spirit, ceasing to deplore
 The burthen of existence. Science then
 Shall be a precious visitant; and then,
 And only then, be worthy of her name:
 For then her heart shall kindle; her dull eye,
 Dull and inanimate, no more shall hang
 Chained to its object in brute slavery;
 But taught with patient interest to watch
 The processes of things, and serve the cause
 Of order and distinctness, not for this
 Shall it forget that its most noble use,
 Its most illustrious province, must be found
 In furnishing clear guidance, a support
 Not treacherous, to the mind's 'excursive' power.
 So build we up the Being that we are;
 Thus deeply drinking-in the soul of things
 We shall be wise perforce; and, while inspired
 By choice, and conscious that the Will is free,
 Shall move unswerving, even as if impelled
 By strict necessity, along the path
 Of order and of good. Whate'er we see,
 Or feel, shall tend to quicken and refine;
 Shall fix, in calmer seats of moral strength,
 Earthly desires; and raise, to loftier heights
 Of divine love, our intellectual soul."

 Here closed the Sage that eloquent harangue,
 Poured forth with fervour in continuous stream,
 Such as, remote, 'mid savage wilderness,
 An Indian Chief discharges from his breast
 Into the hearing of assembled tribes,
 In open circle seated round, and hushed
 As the unbreathing air, when not a leaf
 Stirs in the mighty woods. So did he speak:
 The words he uttered shall not pass away
 Dispersed, like music that the wind takes up
 By snatches, and lets fall, to be forgotten;
 No they sank into me, the bounteous gift
 Of one whom time and nature had made wise,
 Gracing his doctrine with authority
 Which hostile spirits silently allow;
 Of one accustomed to desires that feed
 On fruitage gathered from the tree of life;
 To hopes on knowledge and experience built;
 Of one in whom persuasion and belief
 Had ripened into faith, and faith become
 A passionate intuition; whence the Soul,
 Though bound to earth by ties of pity and love,
 From all injurious servitude was free.

 The Sun, before his place of rest were reached,
 Had yet to travel far, but unto us,
 To us who stood low in that hollow dell,
 He had become invisible, a pomp
 Leaving behind of yellow radiance spread
 Over the mountain sides, in contrast bold
 With ample shadows, seemingly, no less
 Than those resplendent lights, his rich bequest;
 A dispensation of his evening power.
 Adown the path that from the glen had led
 The funeral train, the Shepherd and his Mate
 Were seen descending: forth to greet them ran
 Our little Page: the rustic pair approach;
 And in the Matron's countenance may be read
 Plain indication that the words, which told
 How that neglected Pensioner was sent
 Before his time into a quiet grave,
 Had done to her humanity no wrong:
 But we are kindly welcomed promptly served
 With ostentatious zeal. Along the floor
 Of the small Cottage in the lonely Dell
 A grateful couch was spread for our repose;
 Where, in the guise of mountaineers, we lay,
 Stretched upon fragrant heath, and lulled by sound
 Of far-off torrents charming the still night,
 And, to tired limbs and over-busy thoughts,
 Inviting sleep and soft forgetfulness.



