---
author: William Wordsworth 
title: Written After The Death Of Charles Lamb
---

 To a good Man of most dear memory
 This Stone is sacred. Here he lies apart
 From the great city where he first drew breath,
 Was reared and taught; and humbly earned his bread,
 To the strict labours of the merchant's desk
 By duty chained. Not seldom did those tasks
 Tease, and the thought of time so spent depress,
 His spirit, but the recompense was high;
 Firm Independence, Bounty's rightful sire;
 Affections, warm as sunshine, free as air;
 And when the precious hours of leisure came,
 Knowledge and wisdom, gained from converse sweet
 With books, or while he ranged the crowded streets
 With a keen eye, and overflowing heart:
 So genius triumphed over seeming wrong,
 And poured out truth in works by thoughtful love
 Inspired works potent over smiles and tears.
 And as round mountain-tops the lightning plays,
 Thus innocently sported, breaking forth
 As from a cloud of some grave sympathy,
 Humour and wild instinctive wit, and all
 The vivid flashes of his spoken words.
 From the most gentle creature nursed in fields
 Had been derived the name he bore a name,
 Wherever Christian altars have been raised,
 Hallowed to meekness and to innocence;
 And if in him meekness at times gave way,
 Provoked out of herself by troubles strange,
 Many and strange, that hung about his life;
 Still, at the centre of his being, lodged
 A soul by resignation sanctified:
 And if too often, self-reproached, he felt
 That innocence belongs not to our kind,
 A power that never ceased to abide in him,
 Charity, 'mid the multitude of sins
 That she can cover, left not his exposed
 To an unforgiving judgment from just Heaven.
 Oh, he was good, if e'er a good Man lived!

 
 
 From a reflecting mind and sorrowing heart
 Those simple lines flowed with an earnest wish,
 Though but a doubting hope, that they might serve
 Fitly to guard the precious dust of him
 Whose virtues called them forth. That aim is missed;
 For much that truth most urgently required
 Had from a faltering pen been asked in vain:
 Yet, haply, on the printed page received,
 The imperfect record, there, may stand unblamed
 As long as verse of mine shall breathe the air
 Of memory, or see the light of love.
 
 Thou wert a scorner of the fields, my Friend,
 But more in show than truth; and from the fields,
 And from the mountains, to thy rural grave
 Transported, my soothed spirit hovers o'er
 Its green untrodden turf, and blowing flowers;
 And taking up a voice shall speak (tho' still
 Awed by the theme's peculiar sanctity
 Which words less free presumed not even to touch)
 Of that fraternal love, whose heaven-lit lamp
 From infancy, through manhood, to the last
 Of threescore years, and to thy latest hour,
 Burnt on with ever-strengthening light, enshrined
 Within thy bosom.
 
 "Wonderful" hath been
 The love established between man and man,
 "Passing the love of women;" and between
 Man and his help-mate in fast wedlock joined
 Through God, is raised a spirit and soul of love
 Without whose blissful influence Paradise
 Had been no Paradise; and earth were now
 A waste where creatures bearing human form,
 Direst of savage beasts, would roam in fear,
 Joyless and comfortless. Our days glide on;
 And let him grieve who cannot choose but grieve
 That he hath been an Elm without his Vine,
 And her bright dower of clustering charities,
 That, round his trunk and branches, might have clung
 Enriching and adorning. Unto thee,
 Not so enriched, not so adorned, to thee
 Was given (say rather, thou of later birth
 Wert given to her) a Sister 'tis a word
 Timidly uttered, for she 'lives', the meek,
 The self-restraining, and the ever-kind;
 In whom thy reason and intelligent heart
 Found for all interests, hopes, and tender cares,
 All softening, humanising, hallowing powers,
 Whether withheld, or for her sake unsought 
 More than sufficient recompense!

 Her love
 (What weakness prompts the voice to tell it here?)
 Was as the love of mothers; and when years,
 Lifting the boy to man's estate, had called
 The long-protected to assume the part
 Of a protector, the first filial tie
 Was undissolved; and, in or out of sight,
 Remained imperishably interwoven
 With life itself. Thus, 'mid a shifting world,
 Did they together testify of time
 And season's difference a double tree
 With two collateral stems sprung from one root;
 Such were they such thro' life they 'might' have been
 In union, in partition only such;
 Otherwise wrought the will of the Most High;
 Yet thro' all visitations and all trials,
 Still they were faithful; like two vessels launched
 From the same beach one ocean to explore
 With mutual help, and sailing to their league
 True, as inexorable winds, or bars
 Floating or fixed of polar ice, allow.
 
 But turn we rather, let my spirit turn
 With thine, O silent and invisible Friend!
 To those dear intervals, nor rare nor brief,
 When reunited, and by choice withdrawn
 From miscellaneous converse, ye were taught
 That the remembrance of foregone distress,
 And the worse fear of future ill (which oft
 Doth hang around it, as a sickly child
 Upon its mother) may be both alike
 Disarmed of power to unsettle present good
 So prized, and things inward and outward held
 In such an even balance, that the heart
 Acknowledges God's grace, his mercy feels,
 And in its depth of gratitude is still.
 
 O gift divine of quiet sequestration!
 The hermit, exercised in prayer and praise,
 And feeding daily on the hope of heaven,
 Is happy in his vow, and fondly cleaves
 To life-long singleness; but happier far
 Was to your souls, and, to the thoughts of others,
 A thousand times more beautiful appeared,
 Your 'dual' loneliness. The sacred tie
 Is broken; yet why grieve? for Time but holds
 His moiety in trust, till Joy shall lead
 To the blest world where parting is unknown.
 
