---
author: William Wordsworth 
title: The Excursion - Book Second - The Solitary
---

 In days of yore how fortunately fared
 The Minstrel! wandering on from hall to hall,
 Baronial court or royal; cheered with gifts
 Munificent, and love, and ladies' praise;
 Now meeting on his road an armed knight,
 Now resting with a pilgrim by the side
 Of a clear brook; beneath an abbey's roof
 One evening sumptuously lodged; the next,
 Humbly in a religious hospital;
 Or with some merry outlaws of the wood;
 Or haply shrouded in a hermit's cell.
 Him, sleeping or awake, the robber spared;
 He walked protected from the sword of war
 By virtue of that sacred instrument
 His harp, suspended at the traveller's side;
 His dear companion wheresoe'er he went
 Opening from land to land an easy way
 By melody, and by the charm of verse.
 Yet not the noblest of that honoured Race
 Drew happier, loftier, more empassioned, thoughts
 From his long journeyings and eventful life,
 Than this obscure Itinerant had skill
 To gather, ranging through the tamer ground
 Of these our unimaginative days;
 Both while he trod the earth in humblest guise
 Accoutred with his burthen and his staff;
 And now, when free to move with lighter pace.

 What wonder, then, if I, whose favourite school
 Hath been the fields, the roads, and rural lanes,
 Looked on this guide with reverential love?
 Each with the other pleased, we now pursued
 Our journey, under favourable skies.
 Turn wheresoe'er we would, he was a light
 Unfailing: not a hamlet could we pass,
 Rarely a house, that did not yield to him
 Remembrances; or from his tongue call forth
 Some way-beguiling tale. Nor less regard
 Accompanied those strains of apt discourse,
 Which nature's various objects might inspire;
 And in the silence of his face I read
 His overflowing spirit. Birds and beasts,
 And the mute fish that glances in the stream,
 And harmless reptile coiling in the sun,
 And gorgeous insect hovering in the air,
 The fowl domestic, and the household dog
 In his capacious mind, he loved them all:
 Their rights acknowledging he felt for all.
 Oft was occasion given me to perceive
 How the calm pleasures of the pasturing herd
 To happy contemplation soothed his walk;
 How the poor brute's condition, forced to run
 Its course of suffering in the public road,
 Sad contrast! all too often smote his heart
 With unavailing pity. Rich in love
 And sweet humanity, he was, himself,
 To the degree that he desired, beloved.
 Smiles of good-will from faces that he knew
 Greeted us all day long; we took our seats
 By many a cottage-hearth, where he received
 The welcome of an Inmate from afar,
 And I at once forgot, I was a Stranger.
 Nor was he loth to enter ragged huts,
 Huts where his charity was blest; his voice
 Heard as the voice of an experienced friend.
 And, sometimes where the poor man held dispute
 With his own mind, unable to subdue
 Impatience through inaptness to perceive
 General distress in his particular lot;
 Or cherishing resentment, or in vain
 Struggling against it; with a soul perplexed,
 And finding in herself no steady power
 To draw the line of comfort that divides
 Calamity, the chastisement of Heaven,
 From the injustice of our brother men
 To him appeal was made as to a judge;
 Who, with an understanding heart, allayed
 The perturbation; listened to the plea;
 Resolved the dubious point; and sentence gave
 So grounded, so applied, that it was heard
 With softened spirit, even when it condemned.

 Such intercourse I witnessed, while we roved,
 Now as his choice directed, now as mine;
 Or both, with equal readiness of will,
 Our course submitting to the changeful breeze
 Of accident. But when the rising sun
 Had three times called us to renew our walk,
 My Fellow-traveller, with earnest voice,
 As if the thought were but a moment old,
 Claimed absolute dominion for the day.
 We started and he led me toward the hills,
 Up through an ample vale, with higher hills
 Before us, mountains stern and desolate;
 But, in the majesty of distance, now
 Set off, and to our ken appearing fair
 Of aspect, with aerial softness clad,
 And beautified with morning's purple beams.

 The wealthy, the luxurious, by the stress
 Of business roused, or pleasure, ere their time,
 May roll in chariots, or provoke the hoofs
 Of the fleet coursers they bestride, to raise
 From earth the dust of morning, slow to rise;
 And they, if blest with health and hearts at ease,
 Shall lack not their enjoyment: but how faint
 Compared with ours! who, pacing side by side,
 Could, with an eye of leisure, look on all
 That we beheld; and lend the listening sense
 To every grateful sound of earth and air;
 Pausing at will our spirits braced, our thoughts
 Pleasant as roses in the thickets blown,
 And pure as dew bathing their crimson leaves.

 Mount slowly, sun! that we may journey long,
 By this dark hill protected from thy beams!
 Such is the summer pilgrim's frequent wish;
 But quickly from among our morning thoughts
 'Twas chased away: for, toward the western side
 Of the broad vale, casting a casual glance,
 We saw a throng of people; wherefore met?
 Blithe notes of music, suddenly let loose
 On the thrilled ear, and flags uprising, yield
 Prompt answer; they proclaim the annual Wake,
 Which the bright season favours. Tabor and pipe
 In purpose join to hasten or reprove
 The laggard Rustic; and repay with boons
 Of merriment a party-coloured knot,
 Already formed upon the village-green.
 Beyond the limits of the shadow cast
 By the broad hill, glistened upon our sight
 That gay assemblage. Round them and above,
 Glitter, with dark recesses interposed,
 Casement, and cottage-roof, and stems of trees
 Half-veiled in vapoury cloud, the silver steam
 Of dews fast melting on their leafy boughs
 By the strong sunbeams smitten. Like a mast
 Of gold, the Maypole shines; as if the rays
 Of morning, aided by exhaling dew,
 With gladsome influence could re-animate
 The faded garlands dangling from its sides.

 Said I, "The music and the sprightly scene
 Invite us; shall we quit our road, and join
 These festive matins?" He replied, "Not loth
 To linger I would here with you partake,
 Not one hour merely, but till evening's close,
 The simple pastimes of the day and place.
 By the fleet Racers, ere the sun be set,
 The turf of yon large pasture will be skimmed;
 There, too, the lusty Wrestlers shall contend:
 But know we not that he, who intermits
 The appointed task and duties of the day,
 Untunes full oft the pleasures of the day;
 Checking the finer spirits that refuse
 To flow when purposes are lightly changed?
 A length of journey yet remains untraced:
 Let us proceed." Then, pointing with his staff
 Raised toward those craggy summits, his intent
 He thus imparted:
 "In a spot that lies
 Among yon mountain fastnesses concealed,
 You will receive, before the hour of noon,
 Good recompense, I hope, for this day's toil,
 From sight of One who lives secluded there,
 Lonesome and lost: of whom, and whose past life,
 (Not to forestall such knowledge as may be
 More faithfully collected from himself)
 This brief communication shall suffice.

 Though now sojourning there, he, like myself,
 Sprang from a stock of lowly parentage
 Among the wilds of Scotland, in a tract
 Where many a sheltered and well-tended plant,
 Bears, on the humblest ground of social life,
 Blossoms of piety and innocence.
 Such grateful promises his youth displayed:
 And, having shown in study forward zeal,
 He to the Ministry was duly called;
 And straight, incited by a curious mind
 Filled with vague hopes, he undertook the charge
 Of Chaplain to a military troop
 Cheered by the Highland bagpipe, as they marched
 In plaided vest, his fellow-countrymen.
 This office filling, yet by native power
 And force of native inclination made
 An intellectual ruler in the haunts
 Of social vanity, he walked the world,
 Gay, and affecting graceful gaiety;
 Lax, buoyant less a pastor with his flock
 Than a soldier among soldiers lived and roamed
 Where Fortune led: and Fortune, who oft proves
 The careless wanderer's friend, to him made known
 A blooming Lady a conspicuous flower,
 Admired for beauty, for her sweetness praised;
 Whom he had sensibility to love,
 Ambition to attempt, and skill to win.

 For this fair Bride, most rich in gifts of mind,
 Nor sparingly endowed with worldly wealth,
 His office he relinquished; and retired
 From the world's notice to a rural home.
 Youth's season yet with him was scarcely past,
 And she was in youth's prime. How free their love,
 How full their joy! 'Till, pitiable doom!
 In the short course of one undreaded year
 Death blasted all. Death suddenly o'erthrew
 Two lovely Children all that they possessed!
 The Mother followed: miserably bare
 The one Survivor stood; he wept, he prayed
 For his dismissal, day and night, compelled
 To hold communion with the grave, and face
 With pain the regions of eternity.
 An uncomplaining apathy displaced
 This anguish; and, indifferent to delight,
 To aim and purpose, he consumed his days,
 To private interest dead, and public care.
 So lived he; so he might have died.
 But now,
 To the wide world's astonishment, appeared
 A glorious opening, the unlooked-for dawn,
 That promised everlasting joy to France!
 Her voice of social transport reached even him!
 He broke from his contracted bounds, repaired
 To the great City, an emporium then
 Of golden expectations, and receiving
 Freights every day from a new world of hope.
 Thither his popular talents he transferred;
 And, from the pulpit, zealously maintained
 The cause of Christ and civil liberty,
 As one, and moving to one glorious end.
 Intoxicating service! I might say
 A happy service; for he was sincere
 As vanity and fondness for applause,
 And new and shapeless wishes, would allow.

 That righteous cause (such power hath freedom) bound,
 For one hostility, in friendly league,
 Ethereal natures and the worst of slaves;
 Was served by rival advocates that came
 From regions opposite as heaven and hell.
 One courage seemed to animate them all:
 And, from the dazzling conquests daily gained
 By their united efforts, there arose
 A proud and most presumptuous confidence
 In the transcendent wisdom of the age,
 And her discernment; not alone in rights,
 And in the origin and bounds of power
 Social and temporal; but in laws divine,
 Deduced by reason, or to faith revealed.
 An overweening trust was raised; and fear
 Cast out, alike of person and of thing.
 Plague from this union spread, whose subtle bane
 The strongest did not easily escape;
 And He, what wonder! took a mortal taint.
 How shall I trace the change, how bear to tell
 That he broke faith with them whom he had laid
 In earth's dark chambers, with a Christian's hope!
 An infidel contempt of holy writ
 Stole by degrees upon his mind; and hence
 Life, like that Roman Janus, double-faced;
 Vilest hypocrisy the laughing, gay
 Hypocrisy, not leagued with fear, but pride.
 Smooth words he had to wheedle simple souls;
 But, for disciples of the inner school,
 Old freedom was old servitude, and they
 The wisest whose opinions stooped the least
 To known restraints; and who most boldly drew
 Hopeful prognostications from a creed,
 That, in the light of false philosophy,
 Spread like a halo round a misty moon,
 Widening its circle as the storms advance.

 His sacred function was at length renounced;
 And every day and every place enjoyed
 The unshackled layman's natural liberty;
 Speech, manners, morals, all without disguise.
 I do not wish to wrong him; though the course
 Of private life licentiously displayed
 Unhallowed actions planted like a crown
 Upon the insolent aspiring brow
 Of spurious notions worn as open signs
 Of prejudice subdued still he retained,
 'Mid much abasement, what he had received
 From nature, an intense and glowing mind.
 Wherefore, when humbled Liberty grew weak,
 And mortal sickness on her face appeared,
 He coloured objects to his own desire
 As with a lover's passion. Yet his moods
 Of pain were keen as those of better men,
 Nay keener, as his fortitude was less:
 And he continued, when worse days were come,
 To deal about his sparkling eloquence,
 Struggling against the strange reverse with zeal
 That showed like happiness. But, in despite
 Of all this outside bravery, within,
 He neither felt encouragement nor hope:
 For moral dignity, and strength of mind,
 Were wanting; and simplicity of life;
 And reverence for himself; and, last and best,
 Confiding thoughts, through love and fear of Him
 Before whose sight the troubles of this world
 Are vain, as billows in a tossing sea.

 The glory of the times fading away
 The splendour, which had given a festal air
 To self-importance, hallowed it, and veiled
 From his own sight this gone, he forfeited
 All joy in human nature; was consumed,
 And vexed, and chafed, by levity and scorn,
 And fruitless indignation; galled by pride;
 Made desperate by contempt of men who throve
 Before his sight in power or fame, and won,
 Without desert, what he desired; weak men,
 Too weak even for his envy or his hate!
 Tormented thus, after a wandering course
 Of discontent, and inwardly opprest
 With malady in part, I fear, provoked
 By weariness of life he fixed his home,
 Or, rather say, sate down by very chance,
 Among these rugged hills; where now he dwells,
 And wastes the sad remainder of his hours,
 Steeped in a self-indulging spleen, that wants not
 Its own voluptuousness; on this resolved,
 With this content, that he will live and die
 Forgotten, at safe distance from 'a world
 Not moving to his mind.'"
 These serious words
 Closed the preparatory notices
 That served my Fellow-traveller to beguile
 The way, while we advanced up that wide vale.
 Diverging now (as if his quest had been
 Some secret of the mountains, cavern, fall
 Of water, or some lofty eminence,
 Renowned for splendid prospect far and wide)
 We scaled, without a track to ease our steps,
 A steep ascent; and reached a dreary plain,
 With a tumultuous waste of huge hill tops
 Before us; savage region! which I paced
 Dispirited: when, all at once, behold!
 Beneath our feet, a little lowly vale,
 A lowly vale, and yet uplifted high
 Among the mountains; even as if the spot
 Had been from eldest time by wish of theirs
 So placed, to be shut out from all the world!
 Urn-like it was in shape, deep as an urn;
 With rocks encompassed, save that to the south
 Was one small opening, where a heath-clad ridge
 Supplied a boundary less abrupt and close;
 A quiet treeless nook, with two green fields,
 A liquid pool that glittered in the sun,
 And one bare dwelling; one abode, no more!
 It seemed the home of poverty and toil,
 Though not of want: the little fields, made green
 By husbandry of many thrifty years,
 Paid cheerful tribute to the moorland house.
 There crows the cock, single in his domain:
 The small birds find in spring no thicket there
 To shroud them; only from the neighbouring vales
 The cuckoo, straggling up to the hill tops,
 Shouteth faint tidings of some gladder place.

 Ah! what a sweet Recess, thought I, is here!
 Instantly throwing down my limbs at ease
 Upon a bed of heath; full many a spot
 Of hidden beauty have I chanced to espy
 Among the mountains; never one like this;
 So lonesome, and so perfectly secure;
 Not melancholy no, for it is green,
 And bright, and fertile, furnished in itself
 With the few needful things that life requires.
 In rugged arms how softly does it lie,
 How tenderly protected! Far and near
 We have an image of the pristine earth,
 The planet in its nakedness: were this
 Man's only dwelling, sole appointed seat,
 First, last, and single, in the breathing world,
 It could not be more quiet; peace is here
 Or nowhere; days unruffled by the gale
 Of public news or private; years that pass
 Forgetfully; uncalled upon to pay
 The common penalties of mortal life,
 Sickness, or accident, or grief, or pain.

 On these and kindred thoughts intent I lay
 In silence musing by my Comrade's side,
 He also silent; when from out the heart
 Of that profound abyss a solemn voice,
 Or several voices in one solemn sound,
 Was heard ascending; mournful, deep, and slow
 The cadence, as of psalms a funeral dirge!
 We listened, looking down upon the hut,
 But seeing no one: meanwhile from below
 The strain continued, spiritual as before;
 And now distinctly could I recognise
 These words: "Shall in the grave thy love be known,
 In death thy faithfulness?" "God rest his soul!'
 Said the old man, abruptly breaking silence,
 "He is departed, and finds peace at last!"

 This scarcely spoken, and those holy strains
 Not ceasing, forth appeared in view a band
 Of rustic persons, from behind the hut
 Bearing a coffin in the midst, with which
 They shaped their course along the sloping side
 Of that small valley, singing as they moved;
 A sober company and few, the men
 Bare-headed, and all decently attired!
 Some steps when they had thus advanced, the dirge
 Ended; and, from the stillness that ensued
 Recovering, to my Friend I said, "You spake,
 Methought, with apprehension that these rites
 Are paid to Him upon whose shy retreat
 This day we purposed to intrude.' "I did so,
 But let us hence, that we may learn the truth:
 Perhaps it is not he but some one else
 For whom this pious service is performed;
 Some other tenant of the solitude."

 So, to a steep and difficult descent
 Trusting ourselves, we wound from crag to crag,
 Where passage could be won; and, as the last
 Of the mute train, behind the heathy top
 Of that off-sloping outlet, disappeared,
 I, more impatient in my downward course,
 Had landed upon easy ground; and there
 Stood waiting for my Comrade. When behold
 An object that enticed my steps aside!
 A narrow, winding, entry opened out
 Into a platform that lay, sheepfold-wise,
 Enclosed between an upright mass of rock
 And one old moss-grown wall; a cool recess,
 And fanciful! For where the rock and wall
 Met in an angle, hung a penthouse, framed
 By thrusting two rude staves into the wall
 And overlaying them with mountain sods;
 To weather-fend a little turf-built seat
 Whereon a full-grown man might rest, nor dread
 The burning sunshine, or a transient shower;
 But the whole plainly wrought by children's hands!
 Whose skill had thronged the floor with a proud show
 Of baby-houses, curiously arranged;
 Nor wanting ornament of walks between,
 With mimic trees inserted in the turf,
 And gardens interposed. Pleased with the sight,
 I could not choose but beckon to my Guide,
 Who, entering, round him threw a careless glance,
 Impatient to pass on, when I exclaimed,
 "Lo! what is here?" and, stooping down, drew forth
 A book, that, in the midst of stones and moss
 And wreck of party-coloured earthen-ware,
 Aptly disposed, had lent its help to raise
 One of those petty structures. "His it must be!"
 Exclaimed the Wanderer, "cannot but be his,
 And he is gone!" The book, which in my hand
 Had opened of itself (for it was swoln
 With searching damp, and seemingly had lain
 To the injurious elements exposed
 From week to week,) I found to be a work
 In the French tongue, a Novel of Voltaire,
 His famous Optimist. "Unhappy Man!"
 Exclaimed my Friend: "here then has been to him
 Retreat within retreat, a sheltering-place
 Within how deep a shelter! He had fits,
 Even to the last, of genuine tenderness,
 And loved the haunts of children: here, no doubt,
 Pleasing and pleased, he shared their simple sports,
 Or sate companionless; and here the book,
 Left and forgotten in his careless way,
 Must by the cottage-children have been found:
 Heaven bless them, and their inconsiderate work!
 To what odd purpose have the darlings turned
 This sad memorial of their hapless friend!"

 "Me," said I, "most doth it surprise, to find
 Such book in such a place!" "A book it is,"
 He answered, "to the Person suited well,
 Though little suited to surrounding things:
 'Tis strange, I grant; and stranger still had been
 To see the Man who owned it, dwelling here,
 With one poor shepherd, far from all the world!
 Now, if our errand hath been thrown away,
 As from these intimations I forebode,
 Grieved shall I be less for my sake than yours,
 And least of all for him who is no more."

 By this, the book was in the old Man's hand;
 And he continued, glancing on the leaves
 An eye of scorn: "The lover," said he, "doomed
 To love when hope hath failed him whom no depth
 Of privacy is deep enough to hide,
 Hath yet his bracelet or his lock of hair,
 And that is joy to him. When change of times
 Hath summoned kings to scaffolds, do but give
 The faithful servant, who must hide his head
 Henceforth in whatsoever nook he may,
 A kerchief sprinkled with his master's blood,
 And he too hath his comforter. How poor,
 Beyond all poverty how destitute,
 Must that Man have been left, who, hither driven,
 Flying or seeking, could yet bring with him
 No dearer relique, and no better stay,
 Than this dull product of a scoffer's pen,
 Impure conceits discharging from a heart
 Hardened by impious pride! I did not fear
 To tax you with this journey;" mildly said
 My venerable Friend, as forth we stepped
 Into the presence of the cheerful light
 "For I have knowledge that you do not shrink
 From moving spectacles; but let us on."

 So speaking, on he went, and at the word
 I followed, till he made a sudden stand:
 For full in view, approaching through a gate
 That opened from the enclosure of green fields
 Into the rough uncultivated ground,
 Behold the Man whom he had fancied dead!
 I knew from his deportment, mien, and dress,
 That it could be no other; a pale face,
 A meagre person, tall, and in a garb
 Not rustic dull and faded like himself!
 He saw us not, though distant but few steps;
 For he was busy, dealing, from a store
 Upon a broad leaf carried, choicest strings
 Of red ripe currants; gift by which he strove,
 With intermixture of endearing words,
 To soothe a Child, who walked beside him, weeping
 As if disconsolate. "They to the grave
 Are bearing him, my Little-one," he said,
 "To the dark pit; but he will feel no pain;
 His body is at rest, his soul in heaven."

 More might have followed but my honoured Friend
 Broke in upon the Speaker with a frank
 And cordial greeting. Vivid was the light
 That flashed and sparkled from the other's eyes;
 He was all fire: no shadow on his brow
 Remained, nor sign of sickness on his face.
 Hands joined he with his Visitant, a grasp,
 An eager grasp; and many moments' space
 When the first glow of pleasure was no more,
 And, of the sad appearance which at once
 Had vanished, much was come and coming back
 An amicable smile retained the life
 Which it had unexpectedly received,
 Upon his hollow cheek. "How kind," he said,
 "Nor could your coming have been better timed;
 For this, you see, is in our narrow world
 A day of sorrow. I have here a charge"
 And, speaking thus, he patted tenderly
 The sun-burnt forehead of the weeping child
 "A little mourner, whom it is my task
 To comfort; but how came ye? if yon track
 (Which doth at once befriend us and betray)
 Conducted hither your most welcome feet,
 Ye could not miss the funeral train they yet
 Have scarcely disappeared." "This blooming Child,"
 Said the old Man, "is of an age to weep
 At any grave or solemn spectacle,
 Inly distressed or overpowered with awe,
 He knows not wherefore; but the boy today,
 Perhaps is shedding orphan's tears; you also
 Must have sustained a loss." "The hand of Death,"
 He answered, "has been here; but could not well
 Have fallen more lightly, if it had not fallen
 Upon myself." The other left these words
 Unnoticed, thus continuing
 "From yon crag,
 Down whose steep sides we dropped into the vale,
 We heard the hymn they sang a solemn sound
 Heard anywhere; but in a place like this
 'Tis more than human! Many precious rites
 And customs of our rural ancestry
 Are gone, or stealing from us; this, I hope,
 Will last for ever. Oft on my way have I
 Stood still, though but a casual passenger,
 So much I felt the awfulness of life,
 In that one moment when the corse is lifted
 In silence, with a hush of decency;
 Then from the threshold moves with song of peace,
 And confidential yearnings, towards its home,
 Its final home on earth. What traveller who
 (How far soe'er a stranger) does not own
 The bond of brotherhood, when he sees them go,
 A mute procession on the houseless road;
 Or passing by some single tenement
 Or clustered dwellings, where again they raise
 The monitory voice? But most of all
 It touches, it confirms, and elevates,
 Then, when the body, soon to be consigned
 Ashes to ashes, dust bequeathed to dust,
 Is raised from the church-aisle, and forward borne
 Upon the shoulders of the next in love,
 The nearest in affection or in blood;
 Yea, by the very mourners who had knelt
 Beside the coffin, resting on its lid
 In silent grief their unuplifted heads,
 And heard meanwhile the Psalmist's mournful plaint,
 And that most awful scripture which declares
 We shall not sleep, but we shall all be changed!
 Have I not seen ye likewise may have seen
 Son, husband, brothers brothers side by side,
 And son and father also side by side,
 Rise from that posture: and in concert move,
 On the green turf following the vested Priest,
 Four dear supporters of one senseless weight,
 From which they do not shrink, and under which
 They faint not, but advance towards the open grave
 Step after step together, with their firm
 Unhidden faces: he that suffers most,
 He outwardly, and inwardly perhaps,
 The most serene, with most undaunted eye!
 Oh! blest are they who live and die like these,
 Loved with such love, and with such sorrow mourned!"

 "That poor Man taken hence to-day," replied
 The Solitary, with a faint sarcastic smile
 Which did not please me, "must be deemed, I fear,
 Of the unblest; for he will surely sink
 Into his mother earth without such pomp
 Of grief, depart without occasion given
 By him for such array of fortitude.
 Full seventy winters hath he lived, and mark!
 This simple Child will mourn his one short hour,
 And I shall miss him: scanty tribute! yet,
 This wanting, he would leave the sight of men,
 If love were his sole claim upon their care,
 Like a ripe date which in the desert falls
 Without a hand to gather it."
 At this
 I interposed, though loth to speak, and said,
 "Can it be thus among so small a band
 As ye must needs be here? in such a place
 I would not willingly, methinks, lose sight
 Of a departing cloud." "'Twas not for love"
 Answered the sick Man with a careless voice
 "That I came hither; neither have I found
 Among associates who have power of speech,
 Nor in such other converse as is here,
 Temptation so prevailing as to change
 That mood, or undermine my first resolve."
 Then, speaking in like careless sort, he said
 To my benign Companion, "Pity 'tis
 That fortune did not guide you to this house
 A few days earlier; then would you have seen
 What stuff the Dwellers in a solitude,
 That seems by Nature hollowed out to be
 The seat and bosom of pure innocence,
 Are made of; an ungracious matter this!
 Which, for truth's sake, yet in remembrance too
 Of past discussions with this zealous friend
 And advocate of humble life, I now
 Will force upon his notice; undeterred
 By the example of his own pure course,
 And that respect and deference which a soul
 May fairly claim, by niggard age enriched
 In what she most doth value, love of God
 And his frail creature Man; but ye shall hear.
 I talk and ye are standing in the sun
 Without refreshment!"
 Quickly had he spoken,
 And, with light steps still quicker than his words,
 Led toward the Cottage. Homely was the spot;
 And, to my feeling, ere we reached the door,
 Had almost a forbidding nakedness;
 Less fair, I grant, even painfully less fair,
 Than it appeared when from the beetling rock
 We had looked down upon it. All within,
 As left by the departed company,
 Was silent; save the solitary clock
 That on mine ear ticked with a mournful sound.
 Following our Guide we clomb the cottage-stairs
 And reached a small apartment dark and low,
 Which was no sooner entered than our Host
 Said gaily, "This is my domain, my cell,
 My hermitage, my cabin, what you will
 I love it better than a snail his house.
 But now ye shall be feasted with our best."

 So, with more ardour than an unripe girl
 Left one day mistress of her mother's stores,
 He went about his hospitable task.
 My eyes were busy, and my thoughts no less,
 And pleased I looked upon my grey-haired Friend,
 As if to thank him; he returned that look,
 Cheered, plainly, and yet serious. What a wreck
 Had we about us! scattered was the floor,
 And, in like sort, chair, window-seat, and shelf,
 With books, maps, fossils, withered plants and flowers,
 And tufts of mountain moss. Mechanic tools
 Lay intermixed with scraps of paper, some
 Scribbled with verse: a broken angling-rod
 And shattered telescope, together linked
 By cobwebs, stood within a dusty nook;
 And instruments of music, some half-made,
 Some in disgrace, hung dangling from the walls.
 But speedily the promise was fulfilled;
 A feast before us, and a courteous Host
 Inviting us in glee to sit and eat.
 A napkin, white as foam of that rough brook
 By which it had been bleached, o'erspread the board;
 And was itself half-covered with a store
 Of dainties, oaten bread, curd, cheese, and cream;
 And cakes of butter curiously embossed,
 Butter that had imbibed from meadow-flowers
 A golden hue, delicate as their own
 Faintly reflected in a lingering stream.
 Nor lacked, for more delight on that warm day,
 Our table, small parade of garden fruits,
 And whortle-berries from the mountain side.
 The Child, who long ere this had stilled his sobs,
 Was now a help to his late comforter,
 And moved, a willing Page, as he was bid,
 Ministering to our need.
 In genial mood,
 While at our pastoral banquet thus we sate
 Fronting the window of that little cell,
 I could not, ever and anon, forbear
 To glance an upward look on two huge Peaks
 That from some other vale peered into this.
 "Those lusty twins," exclaimed our host, "if here
 It were your lot to dwell, would soon become
 Your prized companions. Many are the notes
 Which, in his tuneful course, the wind draws forth
 From rocks, woods, caverns, heaths, and dashing shores;
 And well those lofty brethren bear their part
 In the wild concert chiefly when the storm
 Rides high; then all the upper air they fill
 With roaring sound, that ceases not to flow,
 Like smoke, along the level of the blast,
 In mighty current; theirs, too, is the song
 Of stream and headlong flood that seldom fails;
 And, in the grim and breathless hour of noon,
 Methinks that I have heard them echo back
 The thunder's greeting. Nor have nature's laws
 Left them ungifted with a power to yield
 Music of finer tone; a harmony,
 So do I call it, though it be the hand
 Of silence, though there be no voice; the clouds,
 The mist, the shadows, light of golden suns,
 Motions of moonlight, all come thither touch,
 And have an answer thither come, and shape
 A language not unwelcome to sick hearts
 And idle spirits: there the sun himself,
 At the calm close of summer's longest day,
 Rests his substantial orb; between those heights
 And on the top of either pinnacle,
 More keenly than elsewhere in night's blue vault,
 Sparkle the stars, as of their station proud.
 Thoughts are not busier in the mind of man
 Than the mute agents stirring there: alone
 Here do I sit and watch "
 A fall of voice,
 Regretted like the nightingale's last note,
 Had scarcely closed this high-wrought strain of rapture
 Ere with inviting smile the Wanderer said:
 "Now for the tale with which you threatened us!"
 "In truth the threat escaped me unawares:
 Should the tale tire you, let this challenge stand
 For my excuse. Dissevered from mankind,
 As to your eyes and thoughts we must have seemed
 When ye looked down upon us from the crag,
 Islanders 'mid a stormy mountain sea,
 We are not so; perpetually we touch
 Upon the vulgar ordinances of the world;
 And he, whom this our cottage hath to-day
 Relinquished, lived dependent for his bread
 Upon the laws of public charity.
 The Housewife, tempted by such slender gains
 As might from that occasion be distilled,
 Opened, as she before had done for me,
 Her doors to admit this homeless Pensioner;
 The portion gave of coarse but wholesome fare
 Which appetite required a blind dull nook,
 Such as she had, the 'kennel' of his rest!
 This, in itself not ill, would yet have been
 Ill borne in earlier life; but his was now
 The still contentedness of seventy years.
 Calm did he sit under the wide-spread tree
 Of his old age: and yet less calm and meek,
 Winningly meek or venerably calm,
 Than slow and torpid; paying in this wise
 A penalty, if penalty it were,
 For spendthrift feats, excesses of his prime.
 I loved the old Man, for I pitied him!
 A task it was, I own, to hold discourse
 With one so slow in gathering up his thoughts,
 But he was a cheap pleasure to my eyes;
 Mild, inoffensive, ready in 'his' way,
 And helpful to his utmost power: and there
 Our housewife knew full well what she possessed!
 He was her vassal of all labour, tilled
 Her garden, from the pasture fetched her kine;
 And, one among the orderly array
 Of hay-makers, beneath the burning sun
 Maintained his place; or heedfully pursued
 His course, on errands bound, to other vales,
 Leading sometimes an inexperienced child
 Too young for any profitable task.
 So moved he like a shadow that performed
 Substantial service. Mark me now, and learn
 For what reward! The moon her monthly round
 Hath not completed since our dame, the queen
 Of this one cottage and this lonely dale,
 Into my little sanctuary rushed
 Voice to a rueful treble humanized,
 And features in deplorable dismay.
 I treat the matter lightly, but, alas!
 It is most serious: persevering rain
 Had fallen in torrents; all the mountain tops
 Were hidden, and black vapours coursed their sides;
 This had I seen, and saw; but, till she spake,
 Was wholly ignorant that my ancient Friend
 Who at her bidding, early and alone,
 Had clomb aloft to delve the moorland turf
 For winter fuel to his noontide meal
 Returned not, and now, haply, on the heights
 Lay at the mercy of this raging storm.
 'Inhuman!' said I 'was an old Man's life
 Not worth the trouble of a thought? alas!
 This notice comes too late.' With joy I saw
 Her husband enter from a distant vale.
 We sallied forth together; found the tools
 Which the neglected veteran had dropped,
 But through all quarters looked for him in vain.
 We shouted but no answer! Darkness fell
 Without remission of the blast or shower,
 And fears for our own safety drove us home.

 I, who weep little, did, I will confess,
 The moment I was seated here alone,
 Honour my little cell with some few tears
 Which anger and resentment could not dry.
 All night the storm endured; and, soon as help
 Had been collected from the neighbouring vale,
 With morning we renewed our quest: the wind
 Was fallen, the rain abated, but the hills
 Lay shrouded in impenetrable mist;
 And long and hopelessly we sought in vain:
 Till, chancing on that lofty ridge to pass
 A heap of ruin almost without walls
 And wholly without roof (the bleached remains
 Of a small chapel, where, in ancient time,
 The peasants of these lonely valleys used
 To meet for worship on that central height)
 We there espied the object of our search,
 Lying full three parts buried among tufts
 Of heath-plant, under and above him strewn,
 To baffle, as he might, the watery storm:
 And there we found him breathing peaceably,
 Snug as a child that hides itself in sport
 'Mid a green hay-cock in a sunny field.
 We spake he made reply, but would not stir
 At our entreaty; less from want of power
 Than apprehension and bewildering thoughts.

 So was he lifted gently from the ground,
 And with their freight homeward the shepherds moved
 Through the dull mist, I following when a step,
 A single step, that freed me from the skirts
 Of the blind vapour, opened to my view
 Glory beyond all glory ever seen
 By waking sense or by the dreaming soul!
 The appearance, instantaneously disclosed,
 Was of a mighty city boldly say
 A wilderness of building, sinking far
 And self-withdrawn into a boundless depth,
 Far sinking into splendour without end!
 Fabric it seemed of diamond and of gold,
 With alabaster domes, and silver spires,
 And blazing terrace upon terrace, high
 Uplifted; here, serene pavilions bright,
 In avenues disposed; there, towers begirt
 With battlements that on their restless fronts
 Bore stars illumination of all gems!
 By earthly nature had the effect been wrought
 Upon the dark materials of the storm
 Now pacified; on them, and on the coves
 And mountain-steeps and summits, whereunto
 The vapours had receded, taking there
 Their station under a cerulean sky.
 Oh, 'twas an unimaginable sight!
 Clouds, mists, streams, watery rocks and emerald turf,
 Clouds of all tincture, rocks and sapphire sky,
 Confused, commingled, mutually inflamed,
 Molten together, and composing thus,
 Each lost in each, that marvellous array
 Of temple, palace, citadel, and huge
 Fantastic pomp of structure without name,
 In fleecy folds voluminous, enwrapped.
 Right in the midst, where interspace appeared
 Of open court, an object like a throne
 Under a shining canopy of state
 Stood fixed; and fixed resemblances were seen
 To implements of ordinary use,
 But vast in size, in substance glorified;
 Such as by Hebrew Prophets were beheld
 In vision forms uncouth of mightiest power
 For admiration and mysterious awe.
 This little Vale, a dwelling-place of Man,
 Lay low beneath my feet; 'twas visible
 I saw not, but I felt that it was there.
 That which I 'saw' was the revealed abode
 Of Spirits in beatitude: my heart
 Swelled in my breast 'I have been dead,' I cried,
 'And now I live! Oh! wherefore 'do' I live?'
 And with that pang I prayed to be no more!
 But I forget our Charge, as utterly
 I then forgot him: there I stood and gazed:
 The apparition faded not away,
 And I descended.
 Having reached the house,
 I found its rescued inmate safely lodged,
 And in serene possession of himself,
 Beside a fire whose genial warmth seemed met
 By a faint shining from the heart, a gleam,
 Of comfort, spread over his pallid face.
 Great show of joy the housewife made, and truly
 Was glad to find her conscience set at ease;
 And not less glad, for sake of her good name,
 That the poor Sufferer had escaped with life.
 But, though he seemed at first to have received
 No harm, and uncomplaining as before
 Went through his usual tasks, a silent change
 Soon showed itself: he lingered three short weeks;
 And from the cottage hath been borne to-day.

 So ends my dolorous tale, and glad I am
 That it is ended." At these words he turned
 And, with blithe air of open fellowship,
 Brought from the cupboard wine and stouter cheer,
 Like one who would be merry. Seeing this,
 My grey-haired Friend said courteously "Nay, nay,
 You have regaled us as a hermit ought;
 Now let us forth into the sun!" Our Host
 Rose, though reluctantly, and forth we went.
