---
author: William Wordsworth 
title: The Romance Of The Water Lily
---

 While Merlin paced the Cornish sands,
 Forth-looking toward the rocks of Scilly,
 The pleased Enchanter was aware
 Of a bright Ship that seemed to hang in air,
 Yet was she work of mortal hands,
 And took from men her name - The Water Lily.

 Soft was the wind, that landward blew;
 And, as the Moon, o'er some dark hill ascendant,
 Grows from a little edge of light
 To a full orb, this Pinnace bright 
 Became, as nearer to the coast she drew,
 More glorious, with spread sail and streaming pendant.

 Upon this winged Shape so fair
 Sage Merlin gazed with admiration:
 Her lineaments, thought he, surpass
 Aught that was ever shown in magic glass;
 Was ever built with patient care;
 Or, at a touch, produced by happiest transformation.

 Now, though a Mechanist, whose skill
 Shames the degenerate grasp of modern science, 
 Grave Merlin (and belike the more
 For practising occult and perilous lore)
 Was subject to a freakish will
 That sapped good thoughts, or scared them with defiance.

 Provoked to envious spleen, he cast
 An altered look upon the advancing Stranger
 Whom he had hailed with joy, and cried,
 "My Art shall help to tame her pride"
 Anon the breeze became a blast,
 And the waves rose, and sky portended danger. 

 With thrilling word, and potent sign
 Traced on the beach, his work the Sorcerer urges;
 The clouds in blacker clouds are lost,
 Like spiteful Fiends that vanish, crossed
 By Fiends of aspect more malign;
 And the winds roused the Deep with fiercer scourges.

 But worthy of the name she bore
 Was this Sea-flower, this buoyant Galley;
 Supreme in loveliness and grace
 Of motion, whether in the embrace 
 Of trusty anchorage, or scudding o'er
 The main flood roughened into hill and valley.

 Behold, how wantonly she laves
 Her sides, the Wizard's craft confounding;
 Like something out of Ocean sprung
 To be for ever fresh and young,
 Breasts the sea-flashes, and huge waves
 Top-gallant high, rebounding and rebounding!

 But Ocean under magic heaves,
 And cannot spare the Thing he cherished: 
 Ah! what avails that she was fair,
 Luminous, blithe, and debonair?
 The storm has stripped her of her leaves;
 The Lily floats no longer! She hath perished.

 Grieve for her, she deserves no less;
 So like, yet so unlike, a living Creature!
 No heart had she, no busy brain;
 Though loved, she could not love again;
 Though pitied, 'feel' her own distress;
 Nor aught that troubles us, the fools of Nature. 

 Yet is there cause for gushing tears;
 So richly was this Galley laden,
 A fairer than herself she bore,
 And, in her struggles, cast ashore;
 A lovely One, who nothing hears
 Of wind or wave, a meek and guileless Maiden.

 Into a cave had Merlin fled
 From mischief, caused by spells himself had muttered;
 And while, repentant all too late,
 In moody posture there he sate, 
 He heard a voice, and saw, with half-raised head,
 A Visitant by whom these words were uttered;

 "On Christian service this frail Bark
 Sailed" (hear me, Merlin!) "under high protection,
 Though on her prow a sign of heathen power
 Was carved a Goddess with a Lily flower,
 The old Egyptian's emblematic mark
 Of joy immortal and of pure affection.

 Her course was for the British strand;
 Her freight, it was a Damsel peerless; 
 God reigns above, and Spirits strong
 May gather to avenge this wrong
 Done to the Princess, and her Land
 Which she in duty left, sad but not cheerless.

 And to Caerleon's loftiest tower
 Soon will the Knights of Arthur's Table
 A cry of lamentation send;
 And all will weep who there attend,
 To grace that Stranger's bridal hour,
 For whom the sea was made unnavigable. 

 Shame! should a Child of royal line
 Die through the blindness of thy malice?"
 Thus to the Necromancer spake
 Nina, the Lady of the Lake,
 A gentle Sorceress, and benign,
 Who ne'er embittered any good man's chalice.

 "What boots," continued she, "to mourn?
 To expiate thy sin endeavour:
 From the bleak isle where she is laid,
 Fetched by our art, the Egyptian Maid 
 May yet to Arthur's court be borne
 Cold as she is, ere life be fled for ever.

 My pearly Boat, a shining Light,
 That brought me down that sunless river,
 Will bear me on from wave to wave,
 And back with her to this sea-cave; 
 Then Merlin! for a rapid flight
 Through air, to thee my Charge will I deliver.

 The very swiftest of thy cars
 Must, when my part is done, be ready; 
 Meanwhile, for further guidance, look
 Into thy own prophetic book;
 And, if that fail, consult the Stars
 To learn thy course; farewell! be prompt and steady."

 This scarcely spoken, she again
 Was seated in her gleaming shallop,
 That, o'er the yet-distempered Deep,
 Pursued its way with bird-like sweep,
 Or like a steed, without a rein,
 Urged o'er the wilderness in sportive gallop. 

 Soon did the gentle Nina reach
 That Isle without a house or haven;
 Landing, she found not what she sought,
 Nor saw of wreck or ruin aught
 But a carved Lotus cast upon the beach
 By the fierce waves, a flower in marble graven.

 Sad relique, but how fair the while!
 For gently each from each retreating
 With backward curve, the leaves revealed
 The bosom half, and half concealed, 
 Of a Divinity, that seemed to smile
 On Nina, as she passed, with hopeful greeting.

 No quest was hers of vague desire,
 Of tortured hope and purpose shaken;
 Following the margin of a bay,
 She spied the lonely Castaway,
 Unmarred, unstripped of her attire,
 But with closed eyes, of breath and bloom forsaken.

 Then Nina, stooping down, embraced,
 With tenderness and mild emotion, 
 The Damsel, in that trance embound;
 And, while she raised her from the ground,
 And in the pearly shallop placed,
 Sleep fell upon the air, and stilled the ocean.

 The turmoil hushed, celestial springs
 Of music opened, and there came a blending
 Of fragrance, underived from earth,
 With gleams that owed not to the sun their birth,
 And that soft rustling of invisible wings
 Which Angels make, on works of love descending. 

 And Nina heard a sweeter voice
 Than if the Goddess of the flower had spoken:
 "Thou hast achieved, fair Dame! what none
 Less pure in spirit could have done;
 Go, in thy enterprise rejoice!
 Air, earth, sea, sky, and heaven, success betoken."

 So cheered, she left that Island bleak,
 A bare rock of the Scilly cluster;
 And, as they traversed the smooth brine,
 The self-illumined Brigantine 
 Shed, on the Slumberer's cold wan cheek
 And pallid brow, a melancholy lustre.

 Fleet was their course, and when they came
 To the dim cavern, whence the river
 Issued into the salt-sea flood,
 Merlin, as fixed in thought he stood,
 Was thus accosted by the Dame;
 "Behold to thee my Charge I now deliver!

 But where attends thy chariot, where?" 
 Quoth Merlin, "Even as I was bidden, 
 So have I done; as trusty as thy barge
 My vehicle shall prove O precious Charge!
 If this be sleep, how soft! if death, how fair!
 Much have my books disclosed, but the end is hidden."

 He spake; and gliding into view
 Forth from the grotto's dimmest chamber
 Came two mute Swans, whose plumes of dusky white
 Changed, as the pair approached the light,
 Drawing an ebon car, their hue
 (Like clouds of sunset) into lucid amber. 

 Once more did gentle Nina lift
 The Princess, passive to all changes:
 The car received her: then up-went
 Into the ethereal element
 The Birds with progress smooth and swift
 As thought, when through bright regions memory ranges.

 Sage Merlin, at the Slumberer's side,
 Instructs the Swans their way to measure;
 And soon Caerleon's towers appeared,
 And notes of minstrelsy were heard 
 From rich pavilions spreading wide,
 For some high day of long-expected pleasure.

 Awe-stricken stood both Knights and Dames
 Ere on firm ground the car alighted;
 Eftsoons astonishment was past,
 For in that face they saw the last
 Last lingering look of clay, that tames
 All pride; by which all happiness is blighted.

 Said Merlin, "Mighty King, fair Lords,
 Away with feast and tilt and tourney! 
 Ye saw, throughout this royal House,
 Ye heard, a rocking marvelous
 Of turrets, and a clash of swords
 Self-shaken, as I closed my airy journey.

 Lo! by a destiny well known
 To mortals, joy is turned to sorrow;
 This is the wished-for Bride, the Maid
 Of Egypt, from a rock conveyed
 Where she by shipwreck had been thrown,
 Ill sight! but grief may vanish ere the morrow." 

 "Though vast thy power, thy words are weak,"
 Exclaimed the King, "a mockery hateful;
 Dutiful Child, her lot how hard!
 Is this her piety's reward?
 Those watery locks, that bloodless cheek!
 O winds without remorse! O shore ungrateful!

 Rich robes are fretted by the moth;
 Towers, temples, fall by stroke of thunder;
 Will that, or deeper thoughts, abate
 A Father's sorrow for her fate? 
 He will repent him of his troth;
 His brain will burn, his stout heart split asunder.

 Alas! and I have caused this woe;
 For, when my prowess from invading Neighbours
 Had freed his Realm, he plighted word
 That he would turn to Christ our Lord,
 And his dear Daughter on a Knight bestow
 Whom I should choose for love and matchless labours.

 Her birth was heathen; but a fence
 Of holy Angels round her hovered: 
 A Lady added to my court
 So fair, of such divine report
 And worship, seemed a recompense
 For fifty kingdoms by my sword recovered.

 Ask not for whom, O Champions true!
 She was reserved by me her life's betrayer;
 She who was meant to be a bride
 Is now a corpse: then put aside
 Vain thoughts, and speed ye, with observance due
 Of Christian rites, in Christian ground to lay her." 

 "The tomb," said Merlin, "may not close
 Upon her yet, earth hide her beauty;
 Not froward to thy sovereign will
 Esteem me, Liege! if I, whose skill
 Wafted her hither, interpose
 To check this pious haste of erring duty.

 My books command me to lay bare
 The secret thou art bent on keeping:
 Here must a high attest be given,
 'What' Bridegroom was for her ordained by Heaven. 
 And in my glass significants there are
 Of things that may to gladness turn this weeping.

 For this, approaching, One by One,
 Thy Knights must touch the cold hand of the Virgin;
 So, for the favoured One, the Flower may bloom
 Once more: but, if unchangeable her doom,
 If life departed be for ever gone,
 Some blest assurance, from this cloud emerging,

 May teach him to bewail his loss;
 Not with a grief that, like a vapour, rises 
 And melts; but grief devout that shall endure,
 And a perpetual growth secure
 Of purposes which no false thought shall cross,
 A harvest of high hopes and noble enterprises."

 "So be it," said the King; "anon,
 Here, where the Princess lies, begin the trial;
 Knights each in order as ye stand
 Step forth." To touch the pallid hand
 Sir Agravaine advanced; no sign he won
 From Heaven or earth; Sir Kaye had like denial. 

 Abashed, Sir Dinas turned away;
 Even for Sir Percival was no disclosure;
 Though he, devoutest of all Champions, ere
 He reached that ebon car, the bier
 Whereon diffused like snow the Damsel lay,
 Full thrice had crossed himself in meek composure.

 Imagine (but ye Saints! who can?)
 How in still air the balance trembled 
 The wishes, peradventure the despites
 That overcame some not ungenerous Knights; 
 And all the thoughts that lengthened out a span
 Of time to Lords and Ladies thus assembled.

 What patient confidence was here!
 And there how many bosoms panted!
 While drawing toward the car Sir Gawaine, mailed
 For tournament, his beaver vailed,
 And softly touched; but, to his princely cheer
 And high expectancy, no sign was granted.

 Next, disencumbered of his harp,
 Sir Tristram, dear to thousands as a brother, 
 Came to the proof, nor grieved that there ensued
 No change; the fair Izonda he had wooed
 With love too true, a love with pangs too sharp,
 From hope too distant, not to dread another.

 Not so Sir Lancelot; from Heaven's grace
 A sign he craved, tired slave of vain contrition;
 The royal Guinever looked passing glad
 When his touch failed. Next came Sir Galahad;
 He paused, and stood entranced by that still face
 Whose features he had seen in noontide vision. 

 For late, as near a murmuring stream
 He rested 'mid an arbour green and shady.
 Nina, the good Enchantress, shed
 A light around his mossy bed;
 And, at her call, a waking dream
 Prefigured to his sense the Egyptian Lady.

 Now, while his bright-haired front he bowed,
 And stood, far-kenned by mantle furred with ermine,
 As o'er the insensate Body hung
 The enrapt, the beautiful, the young, 
 Belief sank deep into the crowd
 That he the solemn issue would determine.

 Nor deem it strange; the Youth had worn
 That very mantle on a day of glory,
 The day when he achieved that matchless feat,
 The marvel of the PERILOUS SEAT,
 Which whosoe'er approached of strength was shorn,
 Though King or Knight the most renowned in story.

 He touched with hesitating hand 
 And lo! those Birds, far-famed through Love's dominions, 
 The Swans, in triumph clap their wings;
 And their necks play, involved in rings,
 Like sinless snakes in Eden's happy land; 
 "Mine is she," cried the Knight; again they clapped their 
 pinions.

 "Mine was she mine she is, though dead,
 And to her name my soul shall cleave in sorrow;"
 Whereat, a tender twilight streak
 Of colour dawned upon the Damsel's cheek;
 And her lips, quickening with uncertain red,
 Seemed from each other a faint warmth to borrow. 

 Deep was the awe, the rapture high,
 Of love emboldened, hope with dread entwining,
 When, to the mouth, relenting Death
 Allowed a soft and flower-like breath,
 Precursor to a timid sigh,
 To lifted eyelids, and a doubtful shining.

 In silence did King Arthur gaze
 Upon the signs that pass away or tarry;
 In silence watched the gentle strife
 Of Nature leading back to life; 
 Then eased his soul at length by praise
 Of God, and Heaven's pure Queen, the blissful Mary.

 Then said he, "Take her to thy heart,
 Sir Galahad! a treasure, that God giveth,
 Bound by indissoluble ties to thee
 Through mortal change and immortality;
 Be happy and unenvied, thou who art
 A goodly Knight that hath no peer that liveth!"

 Not long the Nuptials were delayed;
 And sage tradition still rehearses 
 The pomp, the glory of that hour
 When toward the altar from her bower
 King Arthur led the Egyptian Maid,
 And Angels caroled these far-echoed verses; 
 
 
 Who shrinks not from alliance
 Of evil with good Powers,
 To God proclaims defiance,
 And mocks whom he adores.

 A Ship to Christ devoted
 From the Land of Nile did go; 
 Alas! the bright Ship floated,
 An Idol at her prow.

 By magic domination,
 The Heaven-permitted vent
 Of purblind mortal passion,
 Was wrought her punishment.

 The Flower the Form within it,
 What served they in her need?
 Her port she could not win it,
 Nor from mishap be freed. 

 The tempest overcame her,
 And she was seen no more;
 But gently, gently blame her,
 She cast a Pearl ashore.

 The Maid to Jesu hearkened,
 And kept to him her faith,
 Till sense in death was darkened,
 Or sleep akin to death.

 But Angels round her pillow
 Kept watch, a viewless band; 
 And, billow favouring billow,
 She reached the destined strand.

 Blest Pair! whate'er befall you,
 Your faith in Him approve
 Who from frail earth can call you
 To bowers of endless love!
 
