---
author: William Wordsworth 
title: To The Same
---

(Ode to Lycoris. May 1817)

 Enough of climbing toil! Ambition treads
 Here, as 'mid busier scenes, ground steep and rough,
 Or slippery even to peril! and each step,
 As we for most uncertain recompence
 Mount toward the empire of the fickle clouds,
 Each weary step, dwarfing the world below,
 Induces, for its old familiar sights,
 Unacceptable feelings of contempt,
 With wonder mixed, that Man could e'er be tied,
 In anxious bondage, to such nice array
 And formal fellowship of petty things!
 Oh! 'tis the 'heart' that magnifies this life,
 Making a truth and beauty of her own;
 And moss-grown alleys, circumscribing shades,
 And gurgling rills, assist her in the work
 More efficaciously than realms outspread,
 As in a map, before the adventurer's gaze,
 Ocean and Earth contending for regard.
 The umbrageous woods are left, how far beneath!
 But lo! where darkness seems to guard the mouth
 Of yon wild cave, whose jagged brows are fringed
 With flaccid threads of ivy, in the still
 And sultry air, depending motionless.
 Yet cool the space within, and not uncheered
 (As whoso enters shall ere long perceive)
 By stealthy influx of the timid day
 Mingling with night, such twilight to compose
 As Numa loved; when, in the Egerian grot,
 From the sage Nymph appearing at his wish,
 He gained whate'er a regal mind might ask,
 Or need, of counsel breathed through lips divine.
 Long as the heat shall rage, let that dim cave
 Protect us, there deciphering as we may
 Diluvian records; or the sighs of Earth
 Interpreting; or counting for old Time
 His minutes, by reiterated drops,
 Audible tears, from some invisible source
 That deepens upon fancy, more and more
 Drawn toward the centre whence those sighs creep forth
 To awe the lightness of humanity:
 Or, shutting up thyself within thyself,
 There let me see thee sink into a mood
 Of gentler thought, protracted till thine eye
 Be calm as water when the winds are gone,
 And no one can tell whither. Dearest Friend!
 We two have known such happy hours together
 That, were power granted to replace them (fetched
 From out the pensive shadows where they lie)
 In the first warmth of their original sunshine,
 Loth should I be to use it: passing sweet
 Are the domains of tender memory!
