---
author: William Wordsworth 
title: Memorials Of A Tour In Italy, 1837 - I. - Musings Near Aquapendente - April 1837
---

 Ye Apennines! with all your fertile vales
 Deeply embosomed, and your winding shores
 Of either sea an Islander by birth,
 A Mountaineer by habit, would resound
 Your praise, in meet accordance with your claims
 Bestowed by Nature, or from man's great deeds
 Inherited: presumptuous thought! it fled
 Like vapour, like a towering cloud, dissolved.
 Not, therefore, shall my mind give way to sadness; 
 Yon snow-white torrent-fall, plumb down it drops
 Yet ever hangs or seems to hang in air,
 Lulling the leisure of that high perched town,
 Aquadendente, in her lofty site
 Its neighbour and its namesake town, and flood
 Forth flashing out of its own gloomy chasm
 Bright sunbeams the fresh verdure of this lawn
 Strewn with grey rocks, and on the horizon's verge,
 O'er intervenient waste, through glimmering haze,
 Unquestionably kenned, that cone-shaped hill
 With fractured summit, no indifferent sight
 To travelers, from such comforts as are thine,
 Bleak Radicofani! escaped with joy 
 These are before me; and the varied scene
 May well suffice, till noon-tide's sultry heat
 Relax, to fix and satisfy the mind
 Passive yet pleased. What! with this Broom in flower
 Close at my side! She bids me fly to greet
 Her sisters, soon like her to be attired
 With golden blossoms opening at the feet
 Of my own Fairfield. The glad greeting given,
 Given with a voice and by a look returned
 Of old companionship, Time counts not minutes
 Ere, from accustomed paths, familiar fields,
 The local Genius hurries me aloft,
 Transported over that cloud-wooing hill,
 Seat Sandal, a fond suitor of the clouds,
 With dream-like smoothness, to Helvellyn's top,
 There to alight upon crisp moss and range,
 Obtaining ampler boon, at every step,
 Of visual sovereignty hills multitudinous,
 (Not Apennine can boast of fairer) hills
 Pride of two nations, wood and lake and plains,
 And prospect right below of deep coves shaped
 By skeleton arms, that, from the mountain's trunk
 Extended, clasp the winds, with mutual moan
 Struggling for liberty, while undismayed
 The shepherd struggles with them. Onward thence
 And downward by the skirt of Greenside fell,
 And by Glenridding-screes, and low Glencoign,
 Places forsaken now, though loving still
 The muses, as they loved them in the days
 Of the old minstrels and the border bards. 
 But here am I fast bound; and let it pass,
 The simple rapture; who that travels far
 To feed his mind with watchful eyes could share
 Or wish to share it? One there surely was,
 "The Wizard of the North," with anxious hope
 Brought to this genial climate, when disease
 Preyed upon body and mind yet not the less
 Had his sunk eye kindled at those dear words
 That spake of bards and minstrels; and his spirit
 Had flown with mine to old Helvellyn's brow,
 Where once together, in his day of strength,
 We stood rejoicing, as if earth were free
 From sorrow, like the sky above our heads.
 
 Years followed years, and when, upon the eve
 Of his last going from Tweed-side, thought turned,
 Or by another's sympathy was led,
 To this bright land, Hope was for him no friend,
 Knowledge no help; Imagination shaped
 No promise. Still, in more than ear-deep seats,
 Survives for me, and cannot but survive
 The tone of voice which wedded borrowed words
 To sadness not their own, when, with faint smile
 Forced by intent to take from speech its edge,
 He said, "When I am there, although 'tis fair,
 'Twill be another Yarrow." Prophecy
 More than fulfilled, as gay Campania's shores
 Soon witnessed, and the city of seven hills,
 Her sparkling fountains and her mouldering tombs;
 And more than all, that Eminence which showed
 Her splendours, seen, not felt, the while he stood
 A few short steps (painful they were) apart
 From Tasso's Convent-haven, and retired grave.
 
 Peace to their Spirits! why should Poesy
 Yield to the lure of vain regret, and hover
 In gloom on wings with confidence outspread
 To move in sunshine? Utter thanks, my Soul!
 Tempered with awe, and sweetened by compassion
 For them who in the shades of sorrow dwell,
 That I so near the term to human life
 Appointed by man's common heritage,
 Frail as the frailest, one withal (if that
 Deserve a thought) but little known to fame 
 Am free to rove where Nature's loveliest looks,
 Art's noblest relics, history's rich bequests,
 Failed to reanimate and but feebly cheered
 The whole world's Darling free to rove at will
 O'er high and low, and if requiring rest,
 Rest from enjoyment only.

 Thanks poured forth
 For what thus far hath blessed my wanderings, thanks
 Fervent but humble as the lips can breathe
 Where gladness seems a duty let me guard
 Those seeds of expectation which the fruit
 Already gathered in this favoured Land
 Enfolds within its core. The faith be mine,
 That He who guides and governs all, approves
 When gratitude, though disciplined to look
 Beyond these transient spheres, doth wear a crown
 Of earthly hope put on with trembling hand;
 Nor is least pleased, we trust, when golden beams,
 Reflected through the mists of age, from hours
 Of innocent delight, remote or recent,
 Shoot but a little way 'tis all they can 
 Into the doubtful future. Who would keep
 Power must resolve to cleave to it through life,
 Else it deserts him, surely as he lives.
 Saints would not grieve nor guardian angels frown
 If one while tossed, as was my lot to be,
 In a frail bark urged by two slender oars
 Over waves rough and deep, that, when they broke,
 Dashed their white foam against the palace walls
 Of Genoa the superb should there be led
 To meditate upon his own appointed tasks,
 However humble in themselves, with thoughts
 Raised and sustained by memory of Him
 Who oftentimes within those narrow bounds
 Rocked on the surge, there tried his spirit's strength
 And grasp of purpose, long ere sailed his ship
 To lay a new world open.
 
 Nor less prized
 Be those impressions which incline the heart
 To mild, to lowly, and to seeming weak,
 Bend that way her desires. The dew, the storm 
 The dew whose moisture fell in gentle drops
 On the small hyssop destined to become,
 By Hebrew ordinance devoutly kept,
 A purifying instrument the storm
 That shook on Lebanon the cedar's top,
 And as it shook, enabling the blind roots
 Further to force their way, endowed its trunk
 With magnitude and strength fit to uphold
 The glorious temple did alike proceed
 From the same gracious will, were both an offspring
 Of bounty infinite.

 Between Powers that aim
 Higher to lift their lofty heads, impelled
 By no profane ambition, Powers that thrive
 By conflict, and their opposites, that trust
 In lowliness a midway tract there lies
 Of thoughtful sentiment for every mind
 Pregnant with good. Young, Middle-aged, and Old,
 From century on to century, must have known
 The emotion nay, more fitly were it said 
 The blest tranquility that sunk so deep
 Into my spirit, when I paced, enclosed
 In Pisa's Campo Santo, the smooth floor
 Of its Arcades paved with sepulchral slabs,
 And through each window's open fretwork looked
 O'er the blank Area of sacred earth
 Fetched from Mount Calvary, or haply delved
 In precincts nearer to the Saviour's tomb,
 By hands of men, humble as brave, who fought
 For its deliverance a capacious field
 That to descendants of the dead it holds
 And to all living mute memento breathes,
 More touching far than ought which on the walls
 Is pictured, or their epitaphs can speak,
 Of the changed City's long-departed power,
 Glory, and wealth, which, perilous as they are,
 Here did not kill, but nourished, Piety.
 And, high above that length of cloistral roof,
 Peering in air and backed by azure sky,
 To kindred contemplations ministers
 The Baptistery's dome, and that which swells
 From the Cathedral pile; and with the twain
 Conjoined in prospect mutable or fixed
 (As hurry on in eagerness the feet,
 Or pause) the summit of the Leaning-tower.
 Nor less remuneration waits on him
 Who having left the Cemetery stands
 In the Tower's shadow, of decline and fall
 Admonished not without some sense of fear,
 Fear that soon vanishes before the sight
 Of splendour unextinguished, pomp unscathed,
 And beauty unimpaired. Grand in itself,
 And for itself, the assemblage, grand and fair
 To view, and for the mind's consenting eye
 A type of age in man, upon its front
 Bearing the world-acknowledged evidence
 Of past exploits, nor fondly after more
 Struggling against the stream of destiny,
 But with its peaceful majesty content.
 Oh what a spectacle at every turn
 The Place unfolds, from pavement skinned with moss
 Or grass-grown spaces, where the heaviest foot
 Provokes no echoes, but must softly tread;
 Where Solitude with Silence paired stops short
 Of Desolation, and to Ruin's scythe
 Decay submits not.
 
 But where'er my steps
 Shall wander, chiefly let me cull with care
 Those images of genial beauty, oft
 Too lovely to be pensive in themselves
 But by reflection made so, which do best
 And fitliest serve to crown with fragrant wreaths
 Life's cup when almost filled with years, like mine
 How lovely robed in forenoon light and shade,
 Each ministering to each, didst thou appear
 Savona, Queen of territory fair
 As aught that marvelous coast thro' all its length
 Yields to the Stranger's eye. Remembrance holds
 As a selected treasure thy one cliff,
 That, while it wore for melancholy crest
 A shattered Convent, yet rose proud to have
 Clinging to its steep sides a thousand herbs
 And shrubs, whose pleasant looks gave proof how kind
 The breath of air can be where earth had else
 Seemed churlish. And behold, both far and near,
 Garden and field all decked with orange bloom,
 And peach and citron, in Spring's mildest breeze
 Expanding; and, along the smooth shore curved
 Into a natural port, a tideless sea,
 To that mild breeze with motion and with voice
 Softly responsive; and, attuned to all
 Those vernal charms of sight and sound, appeared
 Smooth space of turf which from the guardian fort
 Sloped seaward, turf whose tender April green,
 In coolest climes too fugitive, might even here
 Plead with the sovereign Sun for longer stay
 Than his unmitigated beams allow,
 Nor plead in vain, if beauty could preserve,
 From mortal change, aught that is born on earth
 Or doth on time depend.

 While on the brink
 Of that high Convent-crested cliff I stood,
 Modest Savona! over all did brood
 A pure poetic Spirit as the breeze,
 Mild as the verdure, fresh the sunshine, bright 
 Thy gentle Chiabrera! not a stone,
 Mural or level with the trodden floor,
 In Church or Chapel, if my curious quest
 Missed not the truth, retains a single name
 Of young or old, warrior, or saint, or sage,
 To whose dear memories his sepulchral verse
 Paid simple tribute, such as might have flowed
 From the clear spring of a plain English heart,
 Say rather, one in native fellowship
 With all who want not skill to couple grief
 With praise, as genuine admiration prompts.
 The grief, the praise, are severed from their dust,
 Yet in his page the records of that worth
 Survive, uninjured; glory then to words,
 Honour to word-preserving Arts, and hail
 Ye kindred local influences that still,
 If Hope's familiar whispers merit faith,
 Await my steps when they the breezy height
 Shall range of philosophic Tusculum;
 Or Sabine vales explored inspire a wish
 To meet the shade of Horace by the side
 Of his Bandusian fount; or I invoke
 His presence to point out the spot where once
 He sate, and eulogized with earnest pen
 Peace, leisure, freedom, moderate desires;
 And all the immunities of rural life
 Extolled, behind Vacuna's crumbling fane.
 Or let me loiter, soothed with what is given
 Nor asking more, on that delicious Bay,
 Parthenope's Domain Virgilian haunt,
 Illustrated with never-dying verse,
 And, by the Poet's laurel-shaded tomb,
 Age after age to Pilgrims from all lands
 Endeared.
 
 And who if not a man as cold
 In heart as dull in brain while pacing ground
 Chosen by Rome's legendary Bards, high minds
 Out of her early struggles well inspired
 To localize heroic acts could look
 Upon the spots with undelighted eye,
 Though even to their last syllable the Lays
 And very names of those who gave them birth
 Have perished? Verily, to her utmost depth,
 Imagination feels what Reason fears not
 To recognize, the lasting virtue lodged
 In those bold fictions that, by deeds assigned
 To the Valerian, Fabian, Curian Race,
 And others like in fame, created Powers
 With attributes from History derived,
 By Poesy irradiate, and yet graced,
 Through marvelous felicity of skill,
 With something more propitious to high aims
 Than either, pent within her separate sphere,
 Can oft with justice claim.

 And not disdaining
 Union with those primeval energies
 To virtue consecrate, stoop ye from your height
 Christian Traditions! at my Spirit's call
 Descend, and, on the brow of ancient Rome
 As she survives in ruin manifest
 Your glories mingled with the brightest hues
 Of her memorial halo, fading, fading,
 But never to be extinct while Earth endures.
 O come, if undishonoured by the prayer,
 From all her Sanctuaries! Open for my feet
 Ye Catacombs, give to mine eyes a glimpse
 Of the Devout, as, 'mid your glooms convened
 For safety, they of yore enclasped the Cross
 On knees that ceased from trembling, or intoned
 Their orisons with voices half-suppressed,
 But sometimes heard, or fancied to be heard,
 Even at this hour.
 
 And thou Mamertine prison,
 Into that vault receive me from whose depth
 Issues, revealed in no presumptuous vision,
 Albeit lifting human to divine,
 A Saint, the Church's Rock, the mystic Keys
 Grasped in his hand; and lo! with upright sword
 Prefiguring his own impendent doom,
 The Apostle of the Gentiles; both prepared
 To suffer pains with heathen scorn and hate
 Inflicted; blessed Men, for so to Heaven
 They follow their dear Lord!

 Time flows nor winds,
 Nor stagnates, nor precipitates his course,
 But many a benefit borne upon his breast
 For human-kind sinks out of sight, is gone,
 No one knows how; nor seldom is put forth
 An angry arm that snatches good away,
 Never perhaps to reappear. The Stream
 Has to our generation brought and brings
 Innumerable gains; yet we, who now
 Walk in the light of day, pertain full surely
 To a chilled age, most pitiably shut out
 From that which 'is' and actuates, by forms,
 Abstractions, and by lifeless fact to fact
 Minutely linked with diligence uninspired,
 Unrectified, unguided, unsustained,
 By godlike insight. To this fate is doomed
 Science, wide-spread and spreading still as be
 Her conquests, in the world of sense made known,
 So with the internal mind it fares; and so
 With morals, trusting, in contempt or fear
 Of vital principle's controlling law,
 To her purblind guide Expediency; and so
 Suffers religious faith. Elate with view
 Of what is won, we overlook or scorn
 The best that should keep pace with it, and must,
 Else more and more the general mind will droop,
 Even as if bent on perishing. There lives
 No faculty within us which the Soul
 Can spare, and humblest earthly Weal demands,
 For dignity not placed beyond her reach,
 Zealous co-operation of all means
 Given or acquired, to raise us from the mire,
 And liberate our hearts from low pursuits.
 By gross Utilities enslaved, we need
 More of ennobling impulse from the past,
 If to the future aught of good must come
 Sounder and therefore holier than the ends
 Which, in the giddiness of self-applause,
 We covet as supreme. O grant the crown
 That Wisdom wears, or take his treacherous staff
 From Knowledge! If the Muse, whom I have served
 This day, be mistress of a single pearl
 Fit to be placed in that pure diadem;
 Then, not in vain, under these chestnut boughs
 Reclined, shall I have yielded up my soul
 To transports from the secondary founts
 Flowing of time and place, and paid to both
 Due homage; nor shall fruitlessly have striven,
 By love of beauty moved, to enshrine in verse
 Accordant meditations, which in times
 Vexed and disordered, as our own, may shed
 Influence, at least among a scattered few,
 To soberness of mind and peace of heart
 Friendly; as here to my repose hath been
 This flowering broom's dear neighbourhood, the light
 And murmur issuing from yon pendent flood,
 And all the varied landscape. Let us now
