---
author: William Wordsworth 
title: Devotional Incitements
---

"Not to the earth confined,
Ascend to heaven."


 Where will they stop, those breathing Powers,
 The Spirits of the new-born flowers?
 They wander with the breeze, they wind
 Where'er the streams a passage find;
 Up from their native ground they rise
 In mute aerial harmonies;
 From humble violet, modest thyme,
 Exhaled, the essential odours climb,
 As if no space below the sky
 Their subtle flight could satisfy:
 Heaven will not tax our thoughts with pride
 If like ambition be 'their' guide.
 
 Roused by this kindliest of May-showers,
 The spirit-quickener of the flowers,
 That with moist virtue softly cleaves
 The buds, and freshens the young leaves,
 The birds pour forth their souls in notes
 Of rapture from a thousand throats 
 Here checked by too impetuous haste,
 While there the music runs to waste,
 With bounty more and more enlarged,
 Till the whole air is overcharged;
 Give ear, O Man! to their appeal
 And thirst for no inferior zeal,
 Thou, who canst 'think', as well as feel.
 
 Mount from the earth; aspire! aspire!
 So pleads the town's cathedral quire,
 In strains that from their solemn height
 Sink, to attain a loftier flight;
 While incense from the altar breathes
 Rich fragrance in embodied wreaths;
 Or, flung from swinging censer, shrouds
 The taper-lights, and curls in clouds
 Around angelic Forms, the still
 Creation of the painter's skill,
 That on the service wait concealed
 One moment, and the next revealed
 Cast off your bonds, awake, arise,
 And for no transient ecstasies!
 What else can mean the visual plea
 Of still or moving imagery
 The iterated summons loud,
 Not wasted on the attendant crowd,
 Nor wholly lost upon the throng
 Hurrying the busy streets along?
 
 Alas! the sanctities combined
 By art to unsensualise the mind,
 Decay and languish; or, as creeds
 And humours change, are spurned like weeds:
 The priests are from their altars thrust;
 Temples are leveled with the dust;
 And solemn rites and awful forms
 Founder amid fanatic storms.
 Yet evermore, through years renewed
 In undisturbed vicissitude
 Of seasons balancing their flight
 On the swift wings of day and night,
 Kind Nature keeps a heavenly door
 Wide open for the scattered Poor.
 Where flower-breathed incense to the skies
 Is wafted in mute harmonies;
 And ground fresh-cloven by the plough
 Is fragrant with a humbler vow;
 Where birds and brooks from leafy dells
 Chime forth unwearied canticles,
 And vapours magnify and spread
 The glory of the sun's bright head
 Still constant in her worship, still
 Conforming to the eternal Will,
 Whether men sow or reap the fields,
 Divine monition Nature yields,
 That not by bread alone we live,
 Or what a hand of flesh can give;
 That every day should leave some part
 Free for a sabbath of the heart:
 So shall the seventh be truly blest,
 From morn to eve, with hallowed rest.
 
