---
author: William Wordsworth 
title: Ode - The Morning Of The Day Appointed For A General Thanksgiving. January 18, 1816
---

 I

 Hail, orient Conqueror of gloomy Night!
 Thou that canst shed the bliss of gratitude
 On hearts howe'er insensible or rude;
 Whether thy punctual visitations smite
 The haughty towers where monarchs dwell;
 Or thou, impartial Sun, with presence bright
 Cheer'st the low threshold of the peasant's cell!
 Not unrejoiced I see thee climb the sky
 In naked splendour, clear from mist or haze,
 Or cloud approaching to divert the rays,
 Which even in deepest winter testify
 Thy power and majesty,
 Dazzling the vision that presumes to gaze.
 Well does thine aspect usher in this Day;
 As aptly suits therewith that modest pace
 Submitted to the chains
 That bind thee to the path which God ordains
 That thou shalt trace,
 Till, with the heavens and earth, thou pass away!
 Nor less, the stillness of these frosty plains,
 Their utter stillness, and the silent grace
 Of yon ethereal summits white with snow,
 (Whose tranquil pomp and spotless purity
 Report of storms gone by
 To us who tread below)
 Do with the service of this Day accord.
 Divinest Object which the uplifted eye
 Of mortal man is suffered to behold;
 Thou, who upon those snow-clad Heights has poured
 Meek lustre, nor forget'st the humble Vale;
 Thou who dost warm Earth's universal mould,
 And for thy bounty wert not unadored
 By pious men of old;
 Once more, heart-cheering Sun, I bid thee hail!
 Bright be thy course to-day, let not this promise fail!

 II

 'Mid the deep quiet of this morning hour,
 All nature seems to hear me while I speak,
 By feelings urged that do not vainly seek
 Apt language, ready as the tuneful notes
 That stream in blithe succession from the throats
 Of birds, in leafy bower,
 Warbling a farewell to a vernal shower.
 There is a radiant though a short-lived flame,
 That burns for Poets in the dawning east;
 And oft my soul hath kindled at the same,
 When the captivity of sleep had ceased;
 But He who fixed immoveably the frame
 Of the round world, and built, by laws as strong,
 A solid refuge for distress, 
 The towers of righteousness;
 He knows that from a holier altar came
 The quickening spark of this day's sacrifice;
 Knows that the source is nobler whence doth rise
 The current of this matin song;
 That deeper far it lies
 Than aught dependent on the fickle skies.

 III

 Have we not conquered? by the vengeful sword?
 Ah no, by dint of Magnanimity;
 That curbed the baser passions, and left free
 A loyal band to follow their liege Lord
 Clear-sighted Honour, and his staid Compeers,
 Along a track of most unnatural years;
 In execution of heroic deeds
 Whose memory, spotless as the crystal beads
 Of morning dew upon the untrodden meads,
 Shall live enrolled above the starry spheres.
 He, who in concert with an earthly string
 Of Britain's acts would sing,
 He with enraptured voice will tell
 Of One whose spirit no reverse could quell;
 Of One that 'mid the failing never failed, 
 Who paints how Britain struggled and prevailed
 Shall represent her labouring with an eye
 Of circumspect humanity;
 Shall show her clothed with strength and skill,
 All martial duties to fulfil;
 Firm as a rock in stationary fight;
 In motion rapid as the lightning's gleam;
 Fierce as a flood-gate bursting at midnight
 To rouse the wicked from their giddy dream, 
 Woe, woe to all that face her in the field!
 Appalled she may not be, and cannot yield.

 IV

 And thus is 'missed' the sole true glory
 That can belong to human story!
 At which they only shall arrive
 Who through the abyss of weakness dive.
 The very humblest are too proud of heart;
 And one brief day is rightly set apart
 For Him who lifteth up and layeth low;
 For that Almighty God to whom we owe,
 Say not that we have vanquished, but that we survive.

 V

 How dreadful the dominion of the impure!
 Why should the Song be tardy to proclaim
 That less than power unbounded could not tame
 That soul of Evil, which, from hell let loose,
 Had filled the astonished world with such abuse
 As boundless patience only could endure?
 Wide-wasted regions, cities wrapt in flame, 
 Who sees, may lift a streaming eye
 To Heaven; who never saw, may heave a sigh;
 But the foundation of our nature shakes,
 And with an infinite pain the spirit aches,
 When desolated countries, towns on fire,
 Are but the avowed attire
 Of warfare waged with desperate mind
 Against the life of virtue in mankind;
 Assaulting without ruth
 The citadels of truth;
 While the fair gardens of civility,
 By ignorance defaced,
 By violence laid waste,
 Perish without reprieve for flower or tree!

 VI

 A crouching purpose, a distracted will, 
 Opposed to hopes that battened upon scorn,
 And to desires whose ever-waxing horn
 Not all the light of earthly power could fill;
 Opposed to dark, deep plots of patient skill,
 And to celerities of lawless force;
 Which, spurning God, had flung away remorse, 
 What could they gain but shadows of redress?
 So bad proceeded propagating worse;
 And discipline was passion's dire excess.
 Widens the fatal web, its lines extend,
 And deadlier poisons in the chalice blend.
 When will your trials teach you to be wise?
 O prostrate Lands, consult your agonies!

 VII

 No more, the guilt is banished,
 And, with the guilt, the shame is fled;
 And, with the guilt and shame, the Woe hath vanished,
 Shaking the dust and ashes from her head!
 No more, these lingerings of distress
 Sully the limpid stream of thankfulness.
 What robe can Gratitude employ
 So seemly as the radiant vest of Joy?
 What steps so suitable as those that move
 In prompt obedience to spontaneous measures
 Of glory, and felicity, and love,
 Surrendering the whole heart to sacred pleasures?

 VIII

 O Britain! dearer far than life is dear,
 If one there be
 Of all thy progeny
 Who can forget thy prowess, never more
 Be that ungrateful Son allowed to hear
 Thy green leaves rustle or thy torrents roar.
 As springs the lion from his den,
 As from a forest-brake
 Upstarts a glistering snake,
 The bold Arch-despot re-appeared; again
 Wide Europe heaves, impatient to be cast,
 With all her armed Powers,
 On that offensive soil, like waves upon a thousand shores.
 The trumpet blew a universal blast!
 But Thou art foremost in the field: there stand:
 Receive the triumph destined to thy hand!
 All States have glorified themselves; their claims
 Are weighed by Providence, in balance even;
 And now, in preference to the mightiest names,
 To Thee the exterminating sword is given.
 Dread mark of approbation, justly gained!
 Exalted office, worthily sustained!

 IX

 Preserve, O Lord! within our hearts
 The memory of thy favour,
 That else insensibly departs,
 And loses its sweet savour!
 Lodge it within us! as the power of light
 Lives inexhaustibly in precious gems,
 Fixed on the front of Eastern diadems,
 So shine our thankfulness for ever bright!
 What offering, what transcendent monument
 Shall our sincerity to Thee present?
 Not work of hands; but trophies that may reach
 To highest Heaven, the labour of the Soul;
 That builds, as thy unerring precepts teach,
 Upon the internal conquests made by each,
 Her hope of lasting glory for the whole.
 Yet will not heaven disown nor earth gainsay
 The outward service of this day;
 Whether the worshippers entreat
 Forgiveness from God's mercy-seat;
 Or thanks and praises to His throne ascend
 That He has brought our warfare to an end,
 And that we need no second victory! 
 Ha! what a ghastly sight for man to see;
 And to the heavenly saints in peace who dwell,
 For a brief moment, terrible;
 But, to thy sovereign penetration, fair,
 Before whom all things are, that were,
 All judgments that have been, or e'er shall be;
 Links in the chain of thy tranquillity!
 Along the bosom of this favoured Nation,
 Breathe Thou, this day, a vital undulation!
 Let all who do this land inherit
 Be conscious of thy moving spirit!
 Oh, 'tis a goodly Ordinance, the sight,
 Though sprung from bleeding war, is one of pure delight;
 Bless Thou the hour, or ere the hour arrive,
 When a whole people shall kneel down in prayer,
 And, at one moment, in one rapture, strive
 With lip and heart to tell their gratitude
 For thy protecting care,
 Their solemn joy, praising the Eternal Lord
 For tyranny subdued,
 And for the sway of equity renewed,
 For liberty confirmed, and peace restored!

 X

 But hark, the summons! down the placid lake
 Floats the soft cadence of the church-tower bells;
 Bright shines the Sun, as if his beams would wake
 The tender insects sleeping in their cells;
 Bright shines the Sun, and not a breeze to shake
 The drops that tip the melting icicles.
 'O, enter now his temple gate!'
 Inviting words, perchance already flung
 (As the crowd press devoutly down the aisle
 Of some old Minster's venerable pile)
 From voices into zealous passion stung,
 While the tubed engine feels the inspiring blast,
 And has begun, its clouds of sound to cast
 Forth towards empyreal Heaven,
 As if the fretted roof were riven.
 'Us', humbler ceremonies now await;
 But in the bosom, with devout respect
 The banner of our joy we will erect,
 And strength of love our souls shall elevate:
 For to a few collected in his name,
 Their heavenly Father will incline an ear
 Gracious to service hallowed by its aim; 
 Awake! the majesty of God revere!
 Go, and with foreheads meekly bowed
 Present your prayers, go, and rejoice aloud,
 The Holy One will hear!
 And what, 'mid silence deep, with faith sincere,
 Ye, in your low and undisturbed estate,
 Shall simply feel and purely meditate, 
 Of warnings, from the unprecedented might,
 Which, in our time, the impious have disclosed;
 And of more arduous duties thence imposed
 Upon the future advocates of right;
 Of mysteries revealed,
 And judgments unrepealed,
 Of earthly revolution,
 And final retribution,
 To his omniscience will appear
 An offering not unworthy to find place,
 On this high DAY of THANKS, before the
 Throne of Grace!

