---
author: William Wordsworth 
title: The Poet's Dream (Sequel To The Norman Boy)
---

 Just as those final words were penned, the sun broke out in power,
 And gladdened all things; but, as chanced, within that very hour,
 Air blackened, thunder growled, fire flashed from clouds that hid the sky,
 And, for the Subject of my Verse, I heaved a pensive sigh.

 Nor could my heart by second thoughts from heaviness be cleared,
 For bodied forth before my eyes the cross-crowned hut appeared;
 And, while around it storm as fierce seemed troubling earth and air,
 I saw, within, the Norman Boy kneeling alone in prayer.

 The Child, as if the thunder's voice spake with articulate call,
 Bowed meekly in submissive fear, before the Lord of All;
 His lips were moving; and his eyes, up-raised to sue for grace,
 With soft illumination cheered the dimness of that place.

 How beautiful is holiness! what wonder if the sight,
 Almost as vivid as a dream, produced a dream at night?
 It came with sleep and showed the Boy, no cherub, not transformed,
 But the poor ragged Thing whose ways my human heart had warmed.

 Me had the dream equipped with wings, so I took him in my arms,
 And lifted from the grassy floor, stilling his faint alarms,
 And bore him high through yielding air my debt of love to pay,
 By giving him, for both our sakes, an hour of holiday.

 I whispered, "Yet a little while, dear Child! thou art my own,
 To show thee some delightful thing, in country or in town.
 What shall it be? a mirthful throng? or that holy place and calm
 St. Denis, filled with royal tombs, or the Church of Notre Dame?

 St. Ouen's golden Shrine? Or choose what else would please thee most
 Of any wonder Normandy, or all proud France, can boast!"
 "My Mother," said the Boy, "was born near to a blessed Tree,
 The Chapel Oak of Allonville; good Angel, show it me!"

 On wings, from broad and steadfast poise let loose by this reply,
 For Allonville, o'er down and dale, away then did we fly;
 O'er town and tower we flew, and fields in May's fresh verdure drest;
 The wings they did not flag; the Child, though grave, was not deprest.

 But who shall show, to waking sense, the gleam of light that broke
 Forth from his eyes, when first the Boy looked down on that huge oak,
 For length of days so much revered, so famous where it stands
 For twofold hallowing, Nature's care, and work of human hands?

 Strong as an Eagle with my charge I glided round and round
 The wide-spread boughs, for view of door, window, and stair that wound
 Gracefully up the gnarled trunk; nor left we unsurveyed
 The pointed steeple peering forth from the centre of the shade.

 I lighted, opened with soft touch the chapel's iron door,
 Past softly, leading in the Boy; and, while from roof to floor
 From floor to roof all round his eyes the Child with wonder cast,
 Pleasure on pleasure crowded in, each livelier than the last.

 For, deftly framed within the trunk, the sanctuary showed,
 By light of lamp and precious stones, that glimmered here, there glowed,
 Shrine, Altar, Image, Offerings hung in sign of gratitude;
 Sight that inspired accordant thoughts; and speech I thus renewed:

 "Hither the Afflicted come, as thou hast heard thy Mother say,
 And, kneeling, supplication make to our Lady de la Paix;
 What mournful sighs have here been heard, and, when the voice was stopt
 By sudden pangs; what bitter tears have on this pavement dropt!

 Poor Shepherd of the naked Down, a favoured lot is thine,
 Far happier lot, dear Boy, than brings full many to this shrine;
 From body pains and pains of soul thou needest no release,
 Thy hours as they flow on are spent, if not in joy, in peace.

 Then offer up thy heart to God in thankfulness and praise,
 Give to Him prayers, and many thoughts, in thy most busy days;
 And in His sight the fragile Cross, on thy small hut, will be
 Holy as that which long hath crowned the Chapel of this Tree;

 Holy as that far seen which crowns the sumptuous Church in Rome
 Where thousands meet to worship God under a mighty Dome;
 He sees the bending multitude, he hears the choral rites,
 Yet not the less, in children's hymns and lonely prayer, delights.


 God for his service needeth not proud work of human skill;
 They please him best who labour most to do in peace his will:
 So let us strive to live, and to our Spirits will be given
 Such wings as, when our Saviour calls, shall bear us up to heaven."

 The Boy no answer made by words, but, so earnest was his look,
 Sleep fled, and with it fled the dream, recorded in this book,
 Lest all that passed should melt away in silence from my mind,
 As visions still more bright have done, and left no trace behind.

 But oh! that Country-man of thine, whose eye, loved Child, can see
 A pledge of endless bliss in acts of early piety,
 In verse, which to thy ear might come, would treat this simple theme,
 Nor leave untold our happy flight in that adventurous dream.

 Alas the dream, to thee, poor Boy! to thee from whom it flowed,
 Was nothing, scarcely can be aught, yet 'twas bounteously bestowed,
 If I may dare to cherish hope that gentle eyes will read
 Not loth, and listening Little-ones, heart-touched, their fancies feed. 
