---
author: William Wordsworth 
title: The Excursion - Book Fifth - The Pastor
---

 "Farewell, deep Valley, with thy one rude House,
 And its small lot of life-supporting fields,
 And guardian rocks! Farewell, attractive seat!
 To the still influx of the morning light
 Open, and day's pure cheerfulness, but veiled
 From human observation, as if yet
 Primeval forests wrapped thee round with dark
 Impenetrable shade; once more farewell,
 Majestic circuit, beautiful abyss,
 By Nature destined from the birth of things 
 For quietness profound!"
 Upon the side
 Of that brown ridge, sole outlet of the vale
 Which foot of boldest stranger would attempt,
 Lingering behind my comrades, thus I breathed
 A parting tribute to a spot that seemed
 Like the fixed centre of a troubled world.
 Again I halted with reverted eyes;
 The chain that would not slacken, was at length
 Snapt, and, pursuing leisurely my way,
 How vain, thought I, is it by change of place 
 To seek that comfort which the mind denies;
 Yet trial and temptation oft are shunned
 Wisely; and by such tenure do we hold
 Frail life's possessions, that even they whose fate
 Yields no peculiar reason of complaint
 Might, by the promise that is here, be won
 To steal from active duties, and embrace
 Obscurity, and undisturbed repose.
 Knowledge, methinks, in these disordered times,
 Should be allowed a privilege to have 
 Her anchorites, like piety of old;
 Men, who, from faction sacred, and unstained
 By war, might, if so minded, turn aside
 Uncensured, and subsist, a scattered few
 Living to God and nature, and content
 With that communion. Consecrated be
 The spots where such abide! But happier still
 The Man, whom, furthermore, a hope attends
 That meditation and research may guide
 His privacy to principles and powers 
 Discovered or invented; or set forth,
 Through his acquaintance with the ways of truth,
 In lucid order; so that, when his course
 Is run, some faithful eulogist may say,
 He sought not praise, and praise did overlook
 His unobtrusive merit; but his life,
 Sweet to himself, was exercised in good
 That shall survive his name and memory.

 Acknowledgments of gratitude sincere
 Accompanied these musings; fervent thanks 
 For my own peaceful lot and happy choice;
 A choice that from the passions of the world
 Withdrew, and fixed me in a still retreat;
 Sheltered, but not to social duties lost,
 Secluded, but not buried; and with song
 Cheering my days, and with industrious thought;
 With the ever-welcome company of books;
 With virtuous friendship's soul-sustaining aid,
 And with the blessings of domestic love.

 Thus occupied in mind I paced along, 
 Following the rugged road, by sledge or wheel
 Worn in the moorland, till I overtook
 My two Associates, in the morning sunshine
 Halting together on a rocky knoll,
 Whence the bare road descended rapidly
 To the green meadows of another vale.

 Here did our pensive Host put forth his hand
 In sign of farewell. "Nay," the old Man said,
 "The fragrant air its coolness still retains;
 The herds and flocks are yet abroad to crop 
 The dewy grass; you cannot leave us now,
 We must not part at this inviting hour."
 He yielded, though reluctant; for his mind
 Instinctively disposed him to retire
 To his own covert; as a billow, heaved
 Upon the beach, rolls back into the sea.
 So we descend: and winding round a rock
 Attain a point that showed the valley stretched
 In length before us; and, not distant far,
 Upon a rising ground a grey church-tower, 
 Whose battlements were screened by tufted trees.
 And towards a crystal Mere, that lay beyond
 Among steep hills and woods embosomed, flowed
 A copious stream with boldly-winding course;
 Here traceable, there hidden there again
 To sight restored, and glittering in the sun.
 On the stream's bank, and everywhere, appeared
 Fair dwellings, single, or in social knots;
 Some scattered o'er the level, others perched
 On the hill sides, a cheerful quiet scene, 
 Now in its morning purity arrayed.

 "As 'mid some happy valley of the Alps,"
 Said I, "once happy, ere tyrannic power,
 Wantonly breaking in upon the Swiss,
 Destroyed their unoffending commonwealth,
 A popular equality reigns here,
 Save for yon stately House beneath whose roof
 A rural lord might dwell." "No feudal pomp,
 Or power," replied the Wanderer, "to that House
 Belongs, but there in his allotted Home 
 Abides, from year to year, a genuine Priest,
 The shepherd of his flock; or, as a king
 Is styled, when most affectionately praised,
 The father of his people. Such is he;
 And rich and poor, and young and old, rejoice
 Under his spiritual sway. He hath vouchsafed
 To me some portion of a kind regard;
 And something also of his inner mind
 Hath he imparted but I speak of him
 As he is known to all.
 The calm delights 
 Of unambitious piety he chose,
 And learning's solid dignity; though born
 Of knightly race, nor wanting powerful friends.
 Hither, in prime of manhood, he withdrew
 From academic bowers. He loved the spot 
 Who does not love his native soil? he prized
 The ancient rural character, composed
 Of simple manners, feelings unsupprest
 And undisguised, and strong and serious thought
 A character reflected in himself, 
 With such embellishment as well beseems
 His rank and sacred function. This deep vale
 Winds far in reaches hidden from our sight,
 And one a turreted manorial hall
 Adorns, in which the good Man's ancestors
 Have dwelt through ages, Patrons of this Cure.
 To them, and to his own judicious pains,
 The Vicar's dwelling, and the whole domain,
 Owes that presiding aspect which might well
 Attract your notice; statelier than could else 
 Have been bestowed, through course of common chance,
 On an unwealthy mountain Benefice."

 This said, oft pausing, we pursued our way;
 Nor reached the village-churchyard till the sun
 Travelling at steadier pace than ours, had risen
 Above the summits of the highest hills,
 And round our path darted oppressive beams.

 As chanced, the portals of the sacred Pile
 Stood open; and we entered. On my frame,
 At such transition from the fervid air, 
 A grateful coolness fell, that seemed to strike
 The heart, in concert with that temperate awe
 And natural reverence which the place inspired.
 Not raised in nice proportions was the pile,
 But large and massy; for duration built;
 With pillars crowded, and the roof upheld
 By naked rafters intricately crossed,
 Like leafless underboughs, in some thick wood,
 All withered by the depth of shade above.
 Admonitory texts inscribed the walls, 
 Each, in its ornamental scroll, enclosed;
 Each also crowned with winged heads a pair
 Of rudely-painted Cherubim. The floor
 Of nave and aisle, in unpretending guise,
 Was occupied by oaken benches ranged
 In seemly rows; the chancel only showed
 Some vain distinctions, marks of earthly state
 By immemorial privilege allowed;
 Though with the Encincture's special sanctity
 But ill according. An heraldic shield, 
 Varying its tincture with the changeful light,
 Imbued the altar-window; fixed aloft
 A faded hatchment hung, and one by time
 Yet undiscoloured. A capacious pew
 Of sculptured oak stood here, with drapery lined;
 And marble monuments were here displayed
 Thronging the walls; and on the floor beneath
 Sepulchral stones appeared, with emblems graven
 And foot-worn epitaphs, and some with small
 And shining effigies of brass inlaid. 

 The tribute by these various records claimed,
 Duly we paid, each after each, and read
 The ordinary chronicle of birth,
 Office, alliance, and promotion all
 Ending in dust; of upright magistrates,
 Grave doctors strenuous for the mother-church,
 And uncorrupted senators, alike
 To king and people true. A brazen plate,
 Not easily deciphered, told of one
 Whose course of earthly honour was begun 
 In quality of page among the train
 Of the eighth Henry, when he crossed the seas
 His royal state to show, and prove his strength
 In tournament, upon the fields of France.
 Another tablet registered the death,
 And praised the gallant bearing, of a Knight
 Tried in the sea-fights of the second Charles.
 Near this brave Knight his Father lay entombed;
 And, to the silent language giving voice,
 I read, how in his manhood's earlier day 

 He, 'mid the afflictions of intestine war
 And rightful government subverted, found
 One only solace that he had espoused
 A virtuous Lady tenderly beloved
 For her benign perfections; and yet more
 Endeared to him, for this, that, in her state
 Of wedlock richly crowned with Heaven's regard,
 She with a numerous issue filled his house,
 Who throve, like plants, uninjured by the storm
 That laid their country waste. No need to speak 
 Of less particular notices assigned
 To Youth or Maiden gone before their time,
 And Matrons and unwedded Sisters old;
 Whose charity and goodness were rehearsed
 In modest panegyric.
 "These dim lines,
 What would they tell?" said I, but, from the task
 Of puzzling out that faded narrative,
 With whisper soft my venerable Friend
 Called me; and, looking down the darksome aisle,
 I saw the Tenant of the lonely vale 
 Standing apart; with curved arm reclined
 On the baptismal font; his pallid face
 Upturned, as if his mind were rapt, or lost
 In some abstraction; gracefully he stood,
 The semblance bearing of a sculptured form
 That leans upon a monumental urn
 In peace, from morn to night, from year to year.

 Him from that posture did the Sexton rouse;
 Who entered, humming carelessly a tune,
 Continuation haply of the notes 
 That had beguiled the work from which he came,
 With spade and mattock o'er his shoulder hung;
 To be deposited, for future need,
 In their appointed place. The pale Recluse
 Withdrew; and straight we followed, to a spot
 Where sun and shade were intermixed; for there
 A broad oak, stretching forth its leafy arms
 From an adjoining pasture, overhung
 Small space of that green churchyard with a light
 And pleasant awning. On the moss-grown wall 
 My ancient Friend and I together took
 Our seats; and thus the Solitary spake,
 Standing before us: 
 "Did you note the mien
 Of that self-solaced, easy-hearted churl,
 Death's hireling, who scoops out his neighbour's grave,
 Or wraps an old acquaintance up in clay,
 All unconcerned as he would bind a sheaf,
 Or plant a tree. And did you hear his voice?
 I was abruptly summoned by the sound
 From some affecting images and thoughts, 
 Which then were silent; but crave utterance now.

 Much," he continued, with dejected look,
 "Much, yesterday, was said in glowing phrase,
 Of our sublime dependencies, and hopes
 For future states of being; and the wings
 Of speculation, joyfully outspread,
 Hovered above our destiny on earth:
 But stoop, and place the prospect of the soul
 In sober contrast with reality,
 And man's substantial life. If this mute earth 
 Of what it holds could speak, and every grave
 Were as a volume, shut, yet capable
 Of yielding its contents to eye and ear,
 We should recoil, stricken with sorrow and shame,
 To see disclosed, by such dread proof, how ill
 That which is done accords with what is known
 To reason, and by conscience is enjoined;
 How idly, how perversely, life's whole course,
 To this conclusion, deviates from the line,
 Or of the end stops short, proposed to all 
 At her aspiring outset.
 Mark the babe
 Not long accustomed to this breathing world;
 One that hath barely learned to shape a smile,
 Though yet irrational of soul, to grasp
 With tiny finger to let fall a tear;
 And, as the heavy cloud of sleep dissolves,
 To stretch his limbs, bemocking, as might seem,
 The outward functions of intelligent man;
 A grave proficient in amusive feats
 Of puppetry, that from the lap declare 
 His expectations, and announce his claims
 To that inheritance which millions rue
 That they were ever born to! In due time
 A day of solemn ceremonial comes;
 When they, who for this Minor hold in trust
 Rights that transcend the loftiest heritage
 Of mere humanity, present their Charge,
 For this occasion daintily adorned,
 At the baptismal font. And when the pure
 And consecrating element hath cleansed 
 The original stain, the child is there received
 Into the second ark, Christ's church, with trust
 That he, from wrath redeemed, therein shall float
 Over the billows of this troublesome world
 To the fair land of everlasting life.
 Corrupt affections, covetous desires,
 Are all renounced; high as the thought of man
 Can carry virtue, virtue is professed;
 A dedication made, a promise given
 For due provision to control and guide, 
 And unremitting progress to ensure
 In holiness and truth."
 "You cannot blame,"
 Here interposing fervently I said,
 "Rites which attest that Man by nature lies
 Bedded for good and evil in a gulf
 Fearfully low; nor will your judgment scorn
 Those services, whereby attempt is made
 To lift the creature toward that eminence
 On which, now fallen, erewhile in majesty
 He stood; or if not so, whose top serene 
 At least he feels 'tis given him to descry;
 Not without aspirations, evermore
 Returning, and injunctions from within
 Doubt to cast off and weariness; in trust
 That what the Soul perceives, if glory lost,
 May be, through pains and persevering hope,
 Recovered; or, if hitherto unknown,
 Lies within reach, and one day shall be gained."

 "I blame them not," he calmly answered "no;
 The outward ritual and established forms 
 With which communities of men invest
 These inward feelings, and the aspiring vows
 To which the lips give public utterance
 Are both a natural process; and by me
 Shall pass uncensured; though the issue prove,
 Bringing from age to age its own reproach,
 Incongruous, impotent, and blank. But, oh!
 If to be weak is to be wretched miserable,
 As the lost Angel by a human voice
 Hath mournfully pronounced, then, in my mind, 
 Far better not to move at all than move
 By impulse sent from such illusive power, 
 That finds and cannot fasten down; that grasps
 And is rejoiced, and loses while it grasps;
 That tempts, emboldens for a time sustains,
 And then betrays; accuses and inflicts
 Remorseless punishment; and so retreads
 The inevitable circle: better far
 Than this, to graze the herb in thoughtless peace,
 By foresight or remembrance, undisturbed! 

 Philosophy! and thou more vaunted name
 Religion! with thy statelier retinue,
 Faith, Hope, and Charity from the visible world
 Choose for your emblems whatsoe'er ye find
 Of safest guidance or of firmest trust 
 The torch, the star, the anchor; nor except
 The cross itself, at whose unconscious feet
 The generations of mankind have knelt
 Ruefully seized, and shedding bitter tears,
 And through that conflict seeking rest of you, 
 High-titled Powers, am I constrained to ask,
 Here standing, with the unvoyageable sky
 In faint reflection of infinitude
 Stretched overhead, and at my pensive feet
 A subterraneous magazine of bones,
 In whose dark vaults my own shall soon be laid,
 Where are your triumphs? your dominion where?
 And in what age admitted and confirmed?
 Not for a happy land do I enquire,
 Island or grove, that hides a blessed few 
 Who, with obedience willing and sincere,
 To your serene authorities conform;
 But whom, I ask, of individual Souls,
 Have ye withdrawn from passion's crooked ways,
 Inspired, and thoroughly fortified? If the heart
 Could be inspected to its inmost folds
 By sight undazzled with the glare of praise,
 Who shall be named in the resplendent line
 Of sages, martyrs, confessors the man
 Whom the best might of faith, wherever fixed, 
 For one day's little compass, has preserved
 From painful and discreditable shocks
 Of contradiction, from some vague desire
 Culpably cherished, or corrupt relapse
 To some unsanctioned fear?"
 "If this be so,
 And Man," said I, "be in his noblest shape
 Thus pitiably infirm; then, he who made,
 And who shall judge the creature, will forgive.
 Yet, in its general tenor, your complaint
 Is all too true; and surely not misplaced: 
 For, from this pregnant spot of ground, such thoughts
 Rise to the notice of a serious mind
 By natural exhalation. With the dead
 In their repose, the living in their mirth,
 Who can reflect, unmoved, upon the round
 Of smooth and solemnized complacencies,
 By which, on Christian lands, from age to age
 Profession mocks performance. Earth is sick,
 And Heaven is weary, of the hollow words
 Which States and Kingdoms utter when they talk 
 Of truth and justice. Turn to private life
 And social neighbourhood; look we to ourselves;
 A light of duty shines on every day
 For all; and yet how few are warmed or cheered!
 How few who mingle with their fellow-men
 And still remain self-governed, and apart,
 Like this our honoured Friend; and thence acquire
 Right to expect his vigorous decline,
 That promises to the end a blest old age!"

 "Yet," with a smile of triumph thus exclaimed 
 The Solitary, "in the life of man,
 If to the poetry of common speech
 Faith may be given, we see as in a glass
 A true reflection of the circling year,
 With all its seasons. Grant that Spring is there,
 In spite of many a rough untoward blast,
 Hopeful and promising with buds and flowers;
 Yet where is glowing Summer's long rich day,
 That 'ought' to follow faithfully expressed?
 And mellow Autumn, charged with bounteous fruit, 
 Where is she imaged? in what favoured clime
 Her lavish pomp, and ripe magnificence?
 Yet, while the better part is missed, the worse
 In man's autumnal season is set forth
 With a resemblance not to be denied,
 And that contents him; bowers that hear no more
 The voice of gladness, less and less supply
 Of outward sunshine and internal warmth;
 And, with this change, sharp air and falling leaves,
 Foretelling aged Winter's desolate sway. 

 How gay the habitations that bedeck
 This fertile valley! Not a house but seems
 To give assurance of content within;
 Embosomed happiness, and placid love;
 As if the sunshine of the day were met
 With answering brightness in the hearts of all
 Who walk this favoured ground. But chance-regards,
 And notice forced upon incurious ears;
 These, if these only, acting in despite
 Of the encomiums by my Friend pronounced 
 On humble life, forbid the judging mind
 To trust the smiling aspect of this fair
 And noiseless commonwealth. The simple race
 Of mountaineers (by nature's self removed
 From foul temptations, and by constant care
 Of a good shepherd tended as themselves
 Do tend their flocks) partake man's general lot
 With little mitigation. They escape,
 Perchance, the heavier woes of guilt; feel not
 The tedium of fantastic idleness: 
 Yet life, as with the multitude, with them
 Is fashioned like an ill-constructed tale;
 That on the outset wastes its gay desires,
 Its fair adventures, its enlivening hopes,
 And pleasant interests for the sequel leaving
 Old things repeated with diminished grace;
 And all the laboured novelties at best
 Imperfect substitutes, whose use and power
 Evince the want and weakness whence they spring."

 While in this serious mood we held discourse, 
 The reverend Pastor toward the churchyard gate
 Approached; and, with a mild respectful air
 Of native cordiality, our Friend
 Advanced to greet him. With a gracious mien
 Was he received, and mutual joy prevailed.
 Awhile they stood in conference, and I guess
 That he, who now upon the mossy wall
 Sate by my side, had vanished, if a wish
 Could have transferred him to the flying clouds,
 Or the least penetrable hiding-place 
 In his own valley's rocky guardianship.
 For me, I looked upon the pair, well pleased:
 Nature had framed them both, and both were marked
 By circumstance, with intermixture fine
 Of contrast and resemblance. To an oak
 Hardy and grand, a weather-beaten oak,
 Fresh in the strength and majesty of age,
 One might be likened: flourishing appeared,
 Though somewhat past the fulness of his prime,
 The other like a stately sycamore, 
 That spreads, in gentle pomp, its honied shade.

 A general greeting was exchanged; and soon
 The Pastor learned that his approach had given
 A welcome interruption to discourse
 Grave, and in truth too often sad. "Is Man
 A child of hope? Do generations press
 On generations, without progress made?
 Halts the individual, ere his hairs be grey,
 Perforce? Are we a creature in whom good
 Preponderates, or evil? Doth the will 
 Acknowledge reason's law? A living power
 Is virtue, or no better than a name,
 Fleeting as health or beauty, and unsound?
 So that the only substance which remains,
 (For thus the tenor of complaint hath run)
 Among so many shadows, are the pains
 And penalties of miserable life,
 Doomed to decay, and then expire in dust!
 Our cogitations, this way have been drawn,
 These are the points," the Wanderer said, "on which 
 Our inquest turns. Accord, good Sir! the light
 Of your experience to dispel this gloom:
 By your persuasive wisdom shall the heart
 That frets, or languishes, be stilled and cheered."

 "Our nature," said the Priest, in mild reply,
 "Angels nay weigh and fathom: they perceive,
 With undistempered and unclouded spirit,
 The object as it is; but, for ourselves,
 That speculative height 'we' may not reach.
 The good and evil are our own; and we 
 Are that which we would contemplate from far.
 Knowledge, for us, is difficult to gain 
 Is difficult to gain, and hard to keep 
 As virtue's self; like virtue is beset
 With snares; tried, tempted, subject to decay.
 Love, admiration, fear, desire, and hate,
 Blind were we without these: through these alone
 Are capable to notice or discern
 Or to record; we judge, but cannot be
 Indifferent judges. 'Spite of proudest boast, 
 Reason, best reason, is to imperfect man
 An effort only, and a noble aim;
 A crown, an attribute of sovereign power,
 Still to be courted never to be won.
 Look forth, or each man dive into himself;
 What sees he but a creature too perturbed;
 That is transported to excess; that yearns,
 Regrets, or trembles, wrongly, or too much;
 Hopes rashly, in disgust as rash recoils;
 Battens on spleen, or moulders in despair; 
 Thus comprehension fails, and truth is missed;
 Thus darkness and delusion round our path
 Spread, from disease, whose subtle injury lurks
 Within the very faculty of sight.

 Yet for the general purposes of faith
 In Providence, for solace and support,
 We may not doubt that who can best subject
 The will to reason's law, can strictliest live
 And act in that obedience, he shall gain
 The clearest apprehension of those truths, 
 Which unassisted reason's utmost power
 Is too infirm to reach. But, waiving this,
 And our regards confining within bounds
 Of less exalted consciousness, through which
 The very multitude are free to range,
 We safely may affirm that human life
 Is either fair and tempting, a soft scene
 Grateful to sight, refreshing to the soul,
 Or a forbidden tract of cheerless view;
 Even as the same is looked at, or approached. 
 Thus, when in changeful April fields are white
 With new-fallen snow, if from the sullen north
 Your walk conduct you hither, ere the sun
 Hath gained his noontide height, this churchyard, filled
 With mounds transversely lying side by side
 From east to west, before you will appear
 An unillumined, blank, and dreary plain,
 With more than wintry cheerlessness and gloom
 Saddening the heart. Go forward, and look back;
 Look, from the quarter whence the lord of light, 
 Of life, of love, and gladness doth dispense
 His beams; which, unexcluded in their fall,
 Upon the southern side of every grave
 Have gently exercised a melting power;
 'Then' will a vernal prospect greet your eye,
 All fresh and beautiful, and green and bright,
 Hopeful and cheerful: vanished is the pall
 That overspread and chilled the sacred turf,
 Vanished or hidden; and the whole domain,
 To some, too lightly minded, might appear 
 A meadow carpet for the dancing hours.
 This contrast, not unsuitable to life,
 Is to that other state more apposite,
 Death and its two-fold aspect! wintry one,
 Cold, sullen, blank, from hope and joy shut out;
 The other, which the ray divine hath touched,
 Replete with vivid promise, bright as spring."

 "We see, then, as we feel," the Wanderer thus
 With a complacent animation spake,
 "And in your judgment, Sir! the mind's repose 
 On evidence is not to be ensured
 By act of naked reason. Moral truth
 Is no mechanic structure, built by rule;
 And which, once built, retains a stedfast shape
 And undisturbed proportions; but a thing
 Subject, you deem, to vital accidents;
 And, like the water-lily, lives and thrives,
 Whose root is fixed in stable earth, whose head
 Floats on the tossing waves. With joy sincere
 I re-salute these sentiments confirmed 
 By your authority. But how acquire
 The inward principle that gives effect
 To outward argument; the passive will
 Meek to admit; the active energy,
 Strong and unbounded to embrace, and firm
 To keep and cherish? how shall man unite
 With self-forgetting tenderness of heart
 An earth-despising dignity of soul?
 Wise in that union, and without it blind!"

 "The way," said I, "to court, if not obtain 
 The ingenuous mind, apt to be set aright;
 This, in the lonely dell discoursing, you
 Declared at large; and by what exercise
 From visible nature, or the inner self
 Power may be trained, and renovation brought
 To those who need the gift. But, after all,
 Is aught so certain as that man is doomed
 To breathe beneath a vault of ignorance?
 The natural roof of that dark house in which
 His soul is pent! How little can be known 
 This is the wise man's sigh; how far we err 
 This is the good man's not unfrequent pang!
 And they perhaps err least, the lowly class
 Whom a benign necessity compels
 To follow reason's least ambitious course;
 Such do I mean who, unperplexed by doubt,
 And unincited by a wish to look
 Into high objects farther than they may,
 Pace to and fro, from morn till eventide,
 The narrow avenue of daily toil 
 For daily bread."
 "Yes," buoyantly exclaimed
 The pale Recluse "praise to the sturdy plough,
 And patient spade; praise to the simple crook,
 And ponderous loom resounding while it holds
 Body and mind in one captivity;
 And let the light mechanic tool be hailed
 With honour; which, encasing by the power
 Of long companionship, the artist's hand,
 Cuts off that hand, with all its world of nerves,
 From a too busy commerce with the heart! 
 Inglorious implements of craft and toil,
 Both ye that shape and build, and ye that force,
 By slow solicitation, earth to yield
 Her annual bounty, sparingly dealt forth
 With wise reluctance; you would I extol,
 Not for gross good alone which ye produce,
 But for the impertinent and ceaseless strife
 Of proofs and reasons ye preclude in those
 Who to your dull society are born,
 And with their humble birthright rest content. 
 Would I had ne'er renounced it!"
 A slight flush
 Of moral anger previously had tinged
 The old Man's cheek; but, at this closing turn
 Of self-reproach, it passed away. Said he,
 "That which we feel we utter; as we think
 So have we argued; reaping for our pains
 No visible recompense. For our relief
 You," to the Pastor turning thus he spake,
 "Have kindly interposed. May I entreat
 Your further help? The mine of real life 
 Dig for us; and present us, in the shape
 Of virgin ore, that gold which we, by pains
 Fruitless as those of aery alchemists,
 Seek from the torturing crucible. There lies
 Around us a domain where you have long
 Watched both the outward course and inner heart:
 Give us, for our abstractions, solid facts;
 For our disputes, plain pictures. Say what man
 He is who cultivates yon hanging field;
 What qualities of mind she bears, who comes, 
 For morn and evening service, with her pail,
 To that green pasture; place before our sight
 The family who dwell within yon house
 Fenced round with glittering laurel; or in that
 Below, from which the curling smoke ascends.
 Or rather, as we stand on holy earth,&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;646
 And have the dead around us, take from them
 Your instances; for they are both best known,
 And by frail man most equitably judged.
 Epitomise the life; pronounce, you can, 
 Authentic epitaphs on some of these
 Who, from their lowly mansions hither brought,
 Beneath this turf lie mouldering at our feet:
 So, by your records, may our doubts be solved;
 And so, not searching higher we may learn
 'To prize the breath we share with human kind;
 And look upon the dust of man with awe'."

 The Priest replied "An office you impose
 For which peculiar requisites are mine;
 Yet much, I feel, is wanting else the task 
 Would be most grateful. True indeed it is
 That they whom death has hidden from our sight
 Are worthiest of the mind's regard; with these
 The future cannot contradict the past:
 Mortality's last exercise and proof
 Is undergone; the transit made that shows
 The very Soul, revealed as she departs.
 Yet, on your first suggestion, will I give,
 Ere we descend into these silent vaults,
 One picture from the living.
 You behold, 
 High on the breast of yon dark mountain, dark
 With stony barrenness, a shining speck
 Bright as a sunbeam sleeping till a shower
 Brush it away, or cloud pass over it;
 And such it might be deemed a sleeping sunbeam;
 But 'tis a plot of cultivated ground,
 Cut off, an island in the dusky waste;
 And that attractive brightness is its own.
 The lofty site, by nature framed to tempt
 Amid a wilderness of rocks and stones 
 The tiller's hand, a hermit might have chosen,
 For opportunity presented, thence
 Far forth to send his wandering eye o'er land
 And ocean, and look down upon the works,
 The habitations, and the ways of men,
 Himself unseen! But no tradition tells
 That ever hermit dipped his maple dish
 In the sweet spring that lurks 'mid yon green fields;
 And no such visionary views belong
 To those who occupy and till the ground, 
 High on that mountain where they long have dwelt
 A wedded pair in childless solitude.
 A house of stones collected on the spot,
 By rude hands built, with rocky knolls in front.
 Backed also by a ledge of rock, whose crest
 Of birch-trees waves over the chimney top;
 A rough abode in colour, shape, and size,
 Such as in unsafe times of border-war
 Might have been wished for and contrived, to elude
 The eye of roving plunderer for their need 
 Suffices; and unshaken bears the assault
 Of their most dreaded foe, the strong Southwest
 In anger blowing from the distant sea.
 Alone within her solitary hut;
 There, or within the compass of her fields,
 At any moment may the Dame be found,
 True as the stock-dove to her shallow nest
 And to the grove that holds it. She beguiles
 By intermingled work of house and field
 The summer's day, and winter's; with success 
 Not equal, but sufficient to maintain,
 Even at the worst, a smooth stream of content,
 Until the expected hour at which her Mate
 From the far-distant quarry's vault returns;
 And by his converse crowns a silent day
 With evening cheerfulness. In powers of mind,
 In scale of culture, few among my flock
 Hold lower rank than this sequestered pair:
 But true humility descends from heaven;
 And that best gift of heaven hath fallen on them; 
 Abundant recompense for every want.
 Stoop from your height, ye proud, and copy these!
 Who, in their noiseless dwelling-place, can hear
 The voice of wisdom whispering scripture texts
 For the mind's government, or temper's peace;
 And recommending for their mutual need,
 Forgiveness, patience, hope, and charity!"

 "Much was I pleased," the grey-haired Wanderer said,
 "When to those shining fields our notice first
 You turned; and yet more pleased have from your lips 
 Gathered this fair report of them who dwell
 In that retirement; whither, by such course
 Of evil hap and good as oft awaits
 A tired way-faring man, once 'I' was brought
 While traversing alone yon mountain pass.
 Dark on my road the autumnal evening fell,
 And night succeeded with unusual gloom,
 So hazardous that feet and hands became
 Guides better than mine eyes until a light
 High in the gloom appeared, too high, methought, 
 For human habitation; but I longed
 To reach it, destitute of other hope.
 I looked with steadiness as sailors look
 On the north star, or watch-tower's distant lamp,
 And saw the light now fixed and shifting now 
 Not like a dancing meteor, but in line
 Of never-varying motion, to and fro.
 It is no night-fire of the naked hills,
 Thought I some friendly covert must be near.
 With this persuasion thitherward my steps 
 I turn, and reach at last the guiding light;
 Joy to myself! but to the heart of her
 Who there was standing on the open hill,
 (The same kind Matron whom your tongue hath praised)
 Alarm and disappointment! The alarm
 Ceased, when she learned through what mishap I came,
 And by what help had gained those distant fields.
 Drawn from her cottage, on that aery height,
 Bearing a lantern in her hand she stood,
 Or paced the ground to guide her Husband home, 
 By that unwearied signal, kenned afar;
 An anxious duty! which the lofty site,
 Traversed but by a few irregular paths,
 Imposes, whensoe'er untoward chance
 Detains him after his accustomed hour
 Till night lies black upon the ground. 'But come,
 Come,' said the Matron, 'to our poor abode;
 Those dark rocks hide it!' Entering, I beheld
 A blazing fire beside a cleanly hearth
 Sate down; and to her office, with leave asked, 
 The Dame returned.
 Or ere that glowing pile
 Of mountain turf required the builder's hand
 Its wasted splendour to repair, the door
 Opened, and she re-entered with glad looks,
 Her Helpmate following. Hospitable fare,
 Frank conversation, made the evening's treat:
 Need a bewildered traveller wish for more?
 But more was given; I studied as we sate
 By the bright fire, the good Man's form, and face
 Not less than beautiful; an open brow 
 Of undisturbed humanity; a cheek
 Suffused with something of a feminine hue;
 Eyes beaming courtesy and mild regard;
 But, in the quicker turns of the discourse,
 Expression slowly varying, that evinced
 A tardy apprehension. From a fount
 Lost, thought I, in the obscurities of time,
 But honoured once, those features and that mien
 May have descended, though I see them here.
 In such a man, so gentle and subdued, 
 Withal so graceful in his gentleness,
 A race illustrious for heroic deeds,
 Humbled, but not degraded, may expire.
 This pleasing fancy (cherished and upheld
 By sundry recollections of such fall
 From high to low, ascent from low to high,
 As books record, and even the careless mind
 Cannot but notice among men and things)
 Went with me to the place of my repose.

 Roused by the crowing cock at dawn of day, 
 I yet had risen too late to interchange
 A morning salutation with my Host,
 Gone forth already to the far-off seat
 Of his day's work. 'Three dark mid-winter months
 'Pass,' said the Matron 'and I never see,
 'Save when the sabbath brings its kind release,
 'My Helpmate's face by light of day. He quits
 'His door in darkness, nor till dusk returns.
 'And, through Heaven's blessing, thus we gain the bread
 'For which we pray; and for the wants provide 
 'Of sickness, accident, and helpless age.
 'Companions have I many; many friends,
 'Dependants, comforters my wheel, my fire,
 'All day the house-clock ticking in mine ear,
 'The cackling hen, the tender chicken brood,
 'And the wild birds that gather round my porch.
 'This honest sheep-dog's countenance I read;
 'With him can talk; nor blush to waste a word
 'On creatures less intelligent and shrewd.
 'And if the blustering wind that drives the clouds 
 'Care not for me, he lingers round my door,
 'And makes me pastime when our tempers suit; 
 'But, above all, my thoughts are my support,
 'My comfort: would that they were oftener fixed
 'On what, for guidance in the way that leads
 'To heaven, I know, by my Redeemer taught.'
 The Matron ended nor could I forbear
 To exclaim 'O happy! yielding to the law
 Of these privations, richer in the main! 
 While thankless thousands are opprest and clogged 
 By ease and leisure; by the very wealth
 And pride of opportunity made poor;
 While tens of thousands falter in their path,
 And sink, through utter want of cheering light;
 For you the hours of labour do not flag;
 For you each evening hath its shining star,
 And every sabbath-day its golden sun.'"

 "Yes!" said the Solitary with a smile
 That seemed to break from an expanding heart,
 "The untutored bird may found, and so construct, 
 And with such soft materials line, her nest
 Fixed in the centre of a prickly brake,
 That the thorns wound her not; they only guard,
 Powers not unjustly likened to those gifts
 Of happy instinct which the woodland bird
 Shares with her species, nature's grace sometimes
 Upon the individual doth confer,
 Among her higher creatures born and trained
 To use of reason. And, I own that, tired
 Of the ostentatious world a swelling stage 
 With empty actions and vain passions stuffed,
 And from the private struggles of mankind
 Hoping far less than I could wish to hope,
 Far less than once I trusted and believed 
 I love to hear of those, who, not contending
 Nor summoned to contend for virtue's prize,
 Miss not the humbler good at which they aim,
 Blest with a kindly faculty to blunt
 The edge of adverse circumstance, and turn
 Into their contraries the petty plagues 
 And hindrances with which they stand beset.
 In early youth, among my native hills,
 I knew a Scottish Peasant who possessed
 A few small crofts of stone-encumbered ground;
 Masses of every shape and size, that lay
 Scattered about under the mouldering walls
 Of a rough precipice; and some, apart,
 In quarters unobnoxious to such chance,
 As if the moon had showered them down in spite.
 But he repined not. Though the plough was scared 
 By these obstructions, 'round the shady stones
 'A fertilising moisture,' said the Swain,
 'Gathers, and is preserved; and feeding dews
 'And damps, through all the droughty summer day
 'From out their substance issuing, maintain
 'Herbage that never fails; no grass springs up
 'So green, so fresh, so plentiful, as mine!'
 But thinly sown these natures; rare, at least,
 The mutual aptitude of seed and soil
 That yields such kindly product. He, whose bed 
 Perhaps yon loose sods cover, the poor Pensioner
 Brought yesterday from our sequestered dell
 Here to lie down in lasting quiet, he,
 If living now, could otherwise report
 Of rustic loneliness: that grey-haired Orphan 
 So call him, for humanity to him
 No parent was feelingly could have told,
 In life, in death, what solitude can breed
 Of selfishness, and cruelty, and vice;
 Or, if it breed not, hath not power to cure. 
 But your compliance, Sir! with our request
 My words too long have hindered."
 Undeterred,
 Perhaps incited rather, by these shocks,
 In no ungracious opposition, given
 To the confiding spirit of his own
 Experienced faith, the reverend Pastor said,
 Around him looking; "Where shall I begin?
 Who shall be first selected from my flock
 Gathered together in their peaceful fold?"
 He paused and having lifted up his eyes 
 To the pure heaven, he cast them down again
 Upon the earth beneath his feet; and spake: 

 "To a mysteriously-united pair
 This place is consecrate; to Death and Life,
 And to the best affections that proceed
 From their conjunction; consecrate to faith
 In him who bled for man upon the cross;
 Hallowed to revelation; and no less
 To reason's mandates: and the hopes divine
 Of pure imagination; above all, 
 To charity, and love, that have provided,
 Within these precincts, a capacious bed
 And receptacle, open to the good
 And evil, to the just and the unjust;
 In which they find an equal resting-place:
 Even as the multitude of kindred brooks
 And streams, whose murmur fills this hollow vale,
 Whether their course be turbulent or smooth,
 Their waters clear or sullied, all are lost
 Within the bosom of yon crystal Lake, 
 And end their journey in the same repose!

 And blest are they who sleep; and we that know,
 While in a spot like this we breathe and walk,
 That all beneath us by the wings are covered
 Of motherly humanity, outspread
 And gathering all within their tender shade,
 Though loth and slow to come! A battlefield,
 In stillness left when slaughter is no more,
 With this compared, makes a strange spectacle!
 A dismal prospect yields the wild shore strewn 
 With wrecks, and trod by feet of young and old
 Wandering about in miserable search
 Of friends or kindred, whom the angry sea
 Restores not to their prayer! Ah! who would think
 That all the scattered subjects which compose
 Earth's melancholy vision through the space
 Of all her climes these wretched, these depraved,
 To virtue lost, insensible of peace,
 From the delights of charity cut off,
 To pity dead, the oppressor and the opprest; 
 Tyrants who utter the destroying word,
 And slaves who will consent to be destroyed 
 Were of one species with the sheltered few,
 Who, with a dutiful and tender hand,
 Lodged, in a dear appropriated spot,
 This file of infants; some that never breathed
 The vital air; others, which, though allowed
 That privilege, did yet expire too soon,
 Or with too brief a warning, to admit
 Administration of the holy rite 
 That lovingly consigns the babe to the arms
 Of Jesus, and his everlasting care.
 These that in trembling hope are laid apart;
 And the besprinkled nursling, unrequired
 Till he begins to smile upon the breast
 That feeds him; and the tottering little-one
 Taken from air and sunshine when the rose
 Of infancy first blooms upon his cheek;
 The thinking, thoughtless, school-boy; the bold youth
 Of soul impetuous, and the bashful maid 
 Smitten while all the promises of life
 Are opening round her; those of middle age,
 Cast down while confident in strength they stand,
 Like pillars fixed more firmly, as might seem,
 And more secure, by very weight of all
 That, for support, rests on them; the decayed
 And burthensome; and lastly, that poor few
 Whose light of reason is with age extinct;
 The hopeful and the hopeless, first and last,
 The earliest summoned and the longest spared 
 Are here deposited, with tribute paid
 Various, but unto each some tribute paid;
 As if, amid these peaceful hills and groves,
 Society were touched with kind concern,
 And gentle 'Nature grieved, that one should die;'&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt; 975
 Or, if the change demanded no regret,
 Observed the liberating stroke and blessed.

 And whence that tribute? wherefore these regards?&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt; 978
 Not from the naked 'Heart' alone of Man
 (Though claiming high distinction upon earth 
 As the sole spring and fountain-head of tears,
 His own peculiar utterance for distress
 Or gladness) No," the philosophic Priest
 Continued, "'tis not in the vital seat
 Of feeling to produce them, without aid
 From the pure soul, the soul sublime and pure;
 With her two faculties of eye and ear,
 The one by which a creature, whom his sins
 Have rendered prone, can upward look to heaven;
 The other that empowers him to perceive 
 The voice of Deity, on height and plain,
 Whispering those truths in stillness, which the word,
 To the four quarters of the winds, proclaims.
 Not without such assistance could the use
 Of these benign observances prevail:
 Thus are they born, thus fostered, thus maintained;
 And by the care prospective of our wise
 Forefathers, who, to guard against the shocks
 The fluctuation and decay of things,
 Embodied and established these high truths 
 In solemn institutions: men convinced
 That life is love and immortality,
 The being one, and one the element.
 There lies the channel, and original bed,
 From the beginning, hollowed out and scooped
 For Man's affections else betrayed and lost
 And swallowed up 'mid deserts infinite!
 This is the genuine course, the aim, and end
 Of prescient reason; all conclusions else
 Are abject, vain, presumptuous, and perverse. 
 The faith partaking of those holy times,
 Life, I repeat, is energy of love
 Divine or human; exercised in pain,
 In strife, and tribulation; and ordained,
 If so approved and sanctified, to pass,
 Through shades and silent rest, to endless joy."


