---
author: William Wordsworth 
title: Grace Darling
---

 Among the dwellers in the silent fields
 The natural heart is touched, and public way
 And crowded street resound with ballad strains,
 Inspired by one whose very name bespeaks
 Favour divine, exalting human love;
 Whom, since her birth on bleak Northumbria's coast,
 Known unto few but prized as far as known,
 A single Act endears to high and low
 Through the whole land to Manhood, moved in spite
 Of the world's freezing cares, to generous Youth,
 To Infancy, that lisps her praise to Age
 Whose eye reflects it, glistening through a tear
 Of tremulous admiration. Such true fame
 Awaits her 'now'; but, verily, good deeds
 Do not imperishable record find
 Save in the rolls of heaven, where hers may live
 A theme for angels, when they celebrate
 The high-souled virtues which forgetful earth
 Has witnessed. Oh! that winds and waves could speak
 Of things which their united power called forth
 From the pure depths of her humanity!
 A Maiden gentle, yet, at duty's call,
 Firm and unflinching, as the Lighthouse reared
 On the Island-rock, her lonely dwelling-place;
 Or like the invincible Rock itself that braves,
 Age after age, the hostile elements,
 As when it guarded holy Cuthbert's cell.

 All night the storm had raged, nor ceased, nor paused,
 When, as day broke, the Maid, through misty air,
 Espies far off a Wreck, amid the surf,
 Beating on one of those disastrous isles,
 Half of a Vessel, half no more; the rest
 Had vanished, swallowed up with all that there
 Had for the common safety striven in vain,
 Or thither thronged for refuge. With quick glance
 Daughter and Sire through optic-glass discern,
 Clinging about the remnant of this Ship,
 Creatures, how precious in the Maiden's sight!
 For whom, belike, the old Man grieves still more
 Than for their fellow-sufferers engulfed
 Where every parting agony is hushed,
 And hope and fear mix not in further strife.
 "But courage, Father! let us out to sea,
 A few may yet be saved." The Daughter's words,
 Her earnest tone, and look beaming with faith,
 Dispel the Father's doubts: nor do they lack
 The noble-minded Mother's helping hand
 To launch the boat; and with her blessing cheered,
 And inwardly sustained by silent prayer,
 Together they put forth, Father and Child!
 Each grasps an oar, and struggling on they go,
 Rivals in effort; and, alike intent
 Here to elude and there surmount, they watch
 The billows lengthening, mutually crossed
 And shattered, and re-gathering their might;
 As if the tumult, by the Almighty's will
 Were, in the conscious sea, roused and prolonged
 That woman's fortitude, so tried, so proved,
 May brighten more and more!

 True to the mark,
 They stem the current of that perilous gorge,
 Their arms still strengthening with the strengthening heart,
 Though danger, as the Wreck is neared, becomes
 More imminent. Not unseen do they approach;
 And rapture, with varieties of fear
 Incessantly conflicting, thrills the frames
 Of those who, in that dauntless energy,
 Foretaste deliverance; but the least perturbed
 Can scarcely trust his eyes, when he perceives
 That of the pair, tossed on the waves to bring
 Hope to the hopeless, to the dying, life,
 One is a Woman, a poor earthly sister,
 Or, be the Visitant other than she seems,
 A guardian Spirit sent from pitying Heaven,
 In woman's shape. But why prolong the tale,
 Casting weak words amid a host of thoughts
 Armed to repel them? Every hazard faced
 And difficulty mastered, with resolve
 That no one breathing should be left to perish,
 This last remainder of the crew are all
 Placed in the little boat, then o'er the deep
 Are safely borne, landed upon the beach,
 And, in fulfilment of God's mercy, lodged
 Within the sheltering Lighthouse. Shout, ye Waves
 Send forth a song of triumph. Waves and Winds,
 Exult in this deliverance wrought through faith
 In Him whose Providence your rage hath served!
 Ye screaming Sea-mews, in the concert join!
 And would that some immortal Voice, a Voice
 Fitly attuned to all that gratitude
 Breathes out from floor or couch, through pallid lips
 Of the survivors, to the clouds might bear,
 Blended with praise of that parental love,
 Beneath whose watchful eye the Maiden grew
 Pious and pure, modest and yet so brave,
 Though young so wise, though meek so resolute,
 Might carry to the clouds and to the stars,
 Yea, to celestial Choirs, Grace Darling's name!
