---
author: William Wordsworth 
title: To The Moon - Composed By The Seaside, On The Coast Of Cumberland
---

 Wanderer! that stoop'st so low, and com'st so near
 To human life's unsettled atmosphere;
 Who lov'st with Night and Silence to partake,
 So might it seem, the cares of them that wake;
 And, through the cottage-lattice softly peeping,
 Dost shield from harm the humblest of the sleeping;
 What pleasure once encompassed those sweet names
 Which yet in thy behalf the Poet claims,
 An idolizing dreamer as of yore!
 I slight them all; and, on this sea-beat shore
 Sole-sitting, only can to thoughts attend
 That bid me hail thee as the Sailor's friend;
 So call thee for heaven's grace through thee made known
 By confidence supplied and mercy shown,
 When not a twinkling star or beacon's light
 Abates the perils of a stormy night;
 And for less obvious benefits, that find
 Their way, with thy pure help, to heart and mind;
 Both for the adventurer starting in life's prime;
 And veteran ranging round from clime to clime,
 Long-baffled hope's slow fever in his veins,
 And wounds and weakness oft his labour's sole remains.
 
 The aspiring Mountains and the winding Streams,
 Empress of Night! are gladdened by thy beams;
 A look of thine the wilderness pervades,
 And penetrates the forest's inmost shades;
 Thou, chequering peaceably the minster's gloom,
 Guid'st the pale Mourner to the lost one's tomb;
 Canst reach the Prisoner, to his grated cell
 Welcome, though silent and intangible!
 And lives there one, of all that come and go
 On the great waters toiling to and fro,
 One, who has watched thee at some quiet hour
 Enthroned aloft in undisputed power,
 Or crossed by vapoury streaks and clouds that move
 Catching the lustre they in part reprove
 Nor sometimes felt a fitness in thy sway
 To call up thoughts that shun the glare of day,
 And make the serious happier than the gay?
 
 Yes, lovely Moon! if thou so mildly bright
 Dost rouse, yet surely in thy own despite,
 To fiercer mood the phrenzy-stricken brain,
 Let me a compensating faith maintain;
 That there's a sensitive, a tender, part
 Which thou canst touch in every human heart,
 For healing and composure. But, as least
 And mightiest billows ever have confessed
 Thy domination; as the whole vast Sea
 Feels through her lowest depths thy sovereignty;
 So shines that countenance with especial grace
 On them who urge the keel her 'plains' to trace
 Furrowing its way right onward. The most rude,
 Cut off from home and country, may have stood
 Even till long gazing hath bedimmed his eye,
 Or the mute rapture ended in a sigh
 Touched by accordance of thy placid cheer,
 With some internal lights to memory dear,
 Or fancies stealing forth to soothe the breast
 Tired with its daily share of earth's unrest,
 Gentle awakenings, visitations meek;
 A kindly influence whereof few will speak,
 Though it can wet with tears the hardiest cheek.
 
 And when thy beauty in the shadowy cave
 Is hidden, buried in its monthly grave;
 Then, while the Sailor, 'mid an open sea
 Swept by a favouring wind that leaves thought free,
 Paces the deck, no star perhaps in sight,
 And nothing save the moving ship's own light
 To cheer the long dark hours of vacant night
 Oft with his musings does thy image blend,
 In his mind's eye thy crescent horns ascend,
 And thou art still, O Moon, that Sailor's friend!

