---
author: William Wordsworth 
title: The Excursion - Book Seventh - The Churchyard Among The Mountains - (Continued)
---

 While thus from theme to theme the Historian passed,
 The words he uttered, and the scene that lay
 Before our eyes, awakened in my mind
 Vivid remembrance of those long-past hours;
 When, in the hollow of some shadowy vale,
 (What time the splendour of the setting sun
 Lay beautiful on Snowdon's sovereign brow,
 On Cader Idris, or huge Penmanmaur)
 A wandering Youth, I listened with delight
 To pastoral melody or warlike air,
 Drawn from the chords of the ancient British harp
 By some accomplished Master, while he sate
 Amid the quiet of the green recess,
 And there did inexhaustibly dispense
 An interchange of soft or solemn tunes,
 Tender or blithe; now, as the varying mood
 Of his own spirit urged, now, as a voice
 From youth or maiden, or some honoured chief
 Of his compatriot villagers (that hung
 Around him, drinking in the impassioned notes
 Of the time-hallowed minstrelsy) required
 For their heart's ease or pleasure. Strains of power
 Were they, to seize and occupy the sense;
 But to a higher mark than song can reach
 Rose this pure eloquence. And, when the stream
 Which overflowed the soul was passed away,
 A consciousness remained that it had left,
 Deposited upon the silent shore
 Of memory, images and precious thoughts,
 That shall not die, and cannot be destroyed.

 "These grassy heaps lie amicably close,"
 Said I, "like surges heaving in the wind
 Along the surface of a mountain pool:
 Whence comes it, then, that yonder we behold
 Five graves, and only five, that rise together
 Unsociably sequestered, and encroaching
 On the smooth playground of the village-school?"

 The Vicar answered, "No disdainful pride
 In them who rest beneath, nor any course
 Of strange or tragic accident, hath helped
 To place those hillocks in that lonely guise.
 Once more look forth, and follow with your sight
 The length of road that from yon mountain's base
 Through bare enclosures stretches, 'till its line
 Is lost within a little tuft of trees;
 Then, reappearing in a moment, quits
 The cultured fields; and up the heathy waste,
 Mounts, as you see, in mazes serpentine,
 Led towards an easy outlet of the vale.
 That little shady spot, that sylvan tuft,
 By which the road is hidden, also hides
 A cottage from our view; though I discern
 (Ye scarcely can) amid its sheltering trees
 The smokeless chimney-top.
 All unembowered
 And naked stood that lowly Parsonage
 (For such in truth it is, and appertains
 To a small Chapel in the vale beyond)
 When hither came its last Inhabitant.
 Rough and forbidding were the choicest roads
 By which our northern wilds could then be crossed;
 And into most of these secluded vales
 Was no access for wain, heavy or light.
 So, at his dwelling-place the Priest arrived
 With store of household goods, in panniers slung
 On sturdy horses graced with jingling bells,
 And on the back of more ignoble beast;
 That, with like burthen of effects most prized
 Or easiest carried, closed the motley train.
 Young was I then, a schoolboy of eight years;
 But still, methinks, I see them as they passed
 In order, drawing toward their wished-for home.
 Rocked by the motion of a trusty ass
 Two ruddy children hung, a well-poised freight,
 Each in his basket nodding drowsily;
 Their bonnets, I remember, wreathed with flowers,
 Which told it was the pleasant month of June;
 And, close behind, the comely Matron rode,
 A woman of soft speech and gracious smile,
 And with a lady's mien. From far they came,
 Even from Northumbrian hills; yet theirs had been
 A merry journey, rich in pastime, cheered
 By music, prank, and laughter-stirring jest;
 And freak put on, and arch word dropped to swell
 The cloud of fancy and uncouth surmise
 That gathered round the slowly-moving train.
 'Whence do they come? and with what errand charged?
 'Belong they to the fortune-telling tribe
 'Who pitch their tents under the greenwood tree?
 'Or Strollers are they, furnished to enact
 'Fair Rosamond, and the Children of the Wood,
 'And, by that whiskered tabby's aid, set forth
 'The lucky venture of sage Whittington,
 'When the next village hears the show announced
 'By blast of trumpet?' Plenteous was the growth
 Of such conjectures, overheard, or seen
 On many a staring countenance portrayed
 Of boor or burgher, as they marched along.
 And more than once their steadiness of face
 Was put to proof, and exercise supplied
 To their inventive humour, by stern looks,
 And questions in authoritative tone,
 From some staid guardian of the public peace,
 Checking the sober steed on which he rode,
 In his suspicious wisdom; oftener still,
 By notice indirect, or blunt demand
 From traveller halting in his own despite,
 A simple curiosity to ease:
 Of which adventures, that beguiled and cheered
 Their grave migration, the good pair would tell,
 With undiminished glee, in hoary age.

 A Priest he was by function; but his course
 From his youth up, and high as manhood's noon,
 (The hour of life to which he then was brought)
 Had been irregular, I might say, wild;
 By books unsteadied, by his pastoral care
 Too little checked. An active, ardent mind;
 A fancy pregnant with resource and scheme
 To cheat the sadness of a rainy day;
 Hands apt for all ingenious arts and games;
 A generous spirit, and a body strong
 To cope with stoutest champions of the bowl
 Had earned for him sure welcome, and the rights
 Of a prized visitant, in the jolly hall
 Of country 'squire; or at the statelier board
 Of duke or earl, from scenes of courtly pomp
 Withdrawn, to while away the summer hours
 In condescension among rural guests.

 With these high comrades he had revelled long,
 Frolicked industriously, a simple Clerk
 By hopes of coming patronage beguiled
 Till the heart sickened. So, each loftier aim
 Abandoning and all his showy friends,
 For a life's stay (slender it was, but sure)
 He turned to this secluded chapelry;
 That had been offered to his doubtful choice
 By an unthought-of patron. Bleak and bare
 They found the cottage, their allotted home;
 Naked without, and rude within; a spot
 With which the Cure not long had been endowed:
 And far remote the chapel stood, remote,
 And, from his Dwelling, unapproachable,
 Save through a gap high in the hills, an opening
 Shadeless and shelterless, by driving showers
 Frequented, and beset with howling winds.
 Yet cause was none, whate'er regret might hang
 On his own mind, to quarrel with the choice
 Or the necessity that fixed him here;
 Apart from old temptations, and constrained
 To punctual labour in his sacred charge.
 See him a constant preacher to the poor!
 And visiting, though not with saintly zeal,
 Yet, when need was, with no reluctant will,
 The sick in body, or distrest in mind;
 And, by a salutary change, compelled
 To rise from timely sleep, and meet the day
 With no engagement, in his thoughts, more proud
 Or splendid than his garden could afford,
 His fields, or mountains by the heath-cock ranged
 Or the wild brooks; from which he now returned
 Contented to partake the quiet meal
 Of his own board, where sat his gentle Mate
 And three fair Children, plentifully fed
 Though simply, from their little household farm;
 Nor wanted timely treat of fish or fowl
 By nature yielded to his practised hand;
 To help the small but certain comings-in
 Of that spare benefice. Yet not the less
 Theirs was a hospitable board, and theirs
 A charitable door.
 So days and years
 Passed on; the inside of that rugged house
 Was trimmed and brightened by the Matron's care,
 And gradually enriched with things of price,
 Which might be lacked for use or ornament.
 What, though no soft and costly sofa there
 Insidiously stretched out its lazy length,
 And no vain mirror glittered upon the walls,
 Yet were the windows of the low abode
 By shutters weather-fended, which at once
 Repelled the storm and deadened its loud roar.
 There snow-white curtains hung in decent folds;
 Tough moss, and long-enduring mountain plants,
 That creep along the ground with sinuous trail,
 Were nicely braided; and composed a work
 Like Indian mats, that with appropriate grace
 Lay at the threshold and the inner doors;
 And a fair carpet, woven of homespun wool
 But tinctured daintily with florid hues,
 For seemliness and warmth, on festal days,
 Covered the smooth blue slabs of mountain-stone
 With which the parlour-floor, in simplest guise
 Of pastoral homesteads, had been long inlaid.

 Those pleasing works the Housewife's skill produced:
 Meanwhile the unsedentary Master's hand
 Was busier with his task to rid, to plant,
 To rear for food, for shelter, and delight;
 A thriving covert! And when wishes, formed
 In youth, and sanctioned by the riper mind,
 Restored me to my native valley, here
 To end my days; well pleased was I to see
 The once-bare cottage, on the mountainside,
 Screened from assault of every bitter blast;
 While the dark shadows of the summer leaves
 Danced in the breeze, chequering its mossy roof.
 Time, which had thus afforded willing help
 To beautify with nature's fairest growths
 This rustic tenement, had gently shed,
 Upon its Master's frame, a wintry grace;
 The comeliness of unenfeebled age.

 But how could I say, gently? for he still
 Retained a flashing eye, a burning palm,
 A stirring foot, a head which beat at nights
 Upon its pillow with a thousand schemes.
 Few likings had he dropped, few pleasures lost;
 Generous and charitable, prompt to serve;
 And still his harsher passions kept their hold
 Anger and indignation. Still he loved
 The sound of titled names, and talked in glee
 Of long-past banquetings with high-born friends:
 Then, from those lulling fits of vain delight
 Uproused by recollected injury, railed
 At their false ways disdainfully, and oft
 In bitterness, and with a threatening eye
 Of fire, incensed beneath its hoary brow.
 Those transports, with staid looks of pure good-will,
 And with soft smile, his consort would reprove.
 She, far behind him in the race of years,
 Yet keeping her first mildness, was advanced
 Far nearer, in the habit of her soul,
 To that still region whither all are bound,
 Him might we liken to the setting sun
 As seen not seldom on some gusty day,
 Struggling and bold, and shining from the west
 With an inconstant and unmellowed light;
 She was a soft attendant cloud, that hung
 As if with wish to veil the restless orb;
 From which it did itself imbibe a ray
 Of pleasing lustre. But no more of this;
 I better love to sprinkle on the sod
 That now divides the pair, or rather say,
 That still unites them, praises, like heaven's dew,
 Without reserve descending upon both.

 Our very first in eminence of years
 This old Man stood, the patriarch of the Vale!
 And, to his unmolested mansion, death
 Had never come, through space of forty years;
 Sparing both old and young in that abode.
 Suddenly then they disappeared: not twice
 Had summer scorched the fields; not twice had fallen,
 On those high peaks, the first autumnal snow,
 Before the greedy visiting was closed,
 And the long-privileged house left empty swept
 As by a plague. Yet no rapacious plague
 Had been among them; all was gentle death,
 One after one, with intervals of peace.
 A happy consummation! an accord
 Sweet, perfect, to be wished for! save that here
 Was something which to mortal sense might sound
 Like harshness, that the old grey-headed Sire,
 The oldest, he was taken last; survived
 When the meek Partner of his age, his Son,
 His Daughter, and that late and high-prized gift,
 His little smiling Grandchild, were no more.

 'All gone all vanished! he deprived and bare,
 'How will he face the remnant of his life?
 'What will become of him?' we said, and mused
 In sad conjectures 'Shall we meet him now
 'Haunting with rod and line the craggy brooks?
 'Or shall we overhear him, as we pass,
 'Striving to entertain the lonely hours
 'With music?' (for he had not ceased to touch
 The harp or viol which himself had framed,
 For their sweet purposes, with perfect skill.)
 'What titles will he keep? will he remain
 'Musician, gardener, builder, mechanist,
 'A planter, and a rearer from the seed?
 'A man of hope and forward-looking mind
 'Even to the last!' Such was he, unsubdued.
 But Heaven was gracious; yet a little while,
 And this Survivor, with his cheerful throng
 Of open projects, and his inward hoard
 Of unsunned griefs, too many and too keen,
 Was overcome by unexpected sleep,
 In one blest moment. Like a shadow thrown
 Softly and lightly from a passing cloud,
 Death fell upon him, while reclined he lay
 For noontide solace on the summer grass,
 The warm lap of his mother earth: and so,
 Their lenient term of separation past,
 That family (whose graves you there behold)
 By yet a higher privilege once more
 Were gathered to each other."
 Calm of mind
 And silence waited on these closing words;
 Until the Wanderer (whether moved by fear
 Lest in those passages of life were some
 That might have touched the sick heart of his Friend
 Too nearly, or intent to reinforce
 His own firm spirit in degree deprest
 By tender sorrow for our mortal state)
 Thus silence broke: "Behold a thoughtless Man
 From vice and premature decay preserved
 By useful habits, to a fitter soil
 Transplanted ere too late. The hermit, lodged
 Amid the untrodden desert, tells his beads,
 With each repeating its allotted prayer,
 And thus divides and thus relieves the time;
 Smooth task, with 'his' compared, whose mind could string,
 Not scantily, bright minutes on the thread
 Of keen domestic anguish; and beguile
 A solitude, unchosen, unprofessed;
 Till gentlest death released him.
 Far from us
 Be the desire too curiously to ask
 How much of this is but the blind result
 Of cordial spirits and vital temperament,
 And what to higher powers is justly due.
 But you, Sir, know that in a neighbouring vale
 A Priest abides before whose life such doubts
 Fall to the ground; whose gifts of nature lie
 Retired from notice, lost in attributes
 Of reason, honourably effaced by debts
 Which her poor treasure-house is content to owe,
 And conquest over her dominion gained,
 To which her frowardness must needs submit.
 In this one Man is shown a temperance proof
 Against all trials; industry severe
 And constant as the motion of the day;
 Stern self-denial round him spread, with shade
 That might be deemed forbidding, did not there
 All generous feelings flourish and rejoice;
 Forbearance, charity in deed and thought,
 And resolution competent to take
 Out of the bosom of simplicity
 All that her holy customs recommend,
 And the best ages of the world prescribe.
 Preaching, administering, in every work
 Of his sublime vocation, in the walks
 Of worldly intercourse between man and man,
 And in his humble dwelling, he appears
 A labourer, with moral virtue girt,
 With spiritual graces, like a glory, crowned."

 "Doubt can be none," the Pastor said, "for whom
 This portraiture is sketched. The great, the good,
 The well-beloved, the fortunate, the wise,
 These titles emperors and chiefs have borne,
 Honour assumed or given: and him, the WONDERFUL,
 Our simple shepherds, speaking from the heart,
 Deservedly have styled. From his abode
 In a dependent chapelry that lies
 Behind yon hill, a poor and rugged wild,
 Which in his soul he lovingly embraced,
 And, having once espoused, would never quit;
 Into its graveyard will ere long be borne
 That lowly, great, good Man. A simple stone
 May cover him; and by its help, perchance,
 A century shall hear his name pronounced,
 With images attendant on the sound;
 Then, shall the slowly-gathering twilight close
 In utter night; and of his course remain
 No cognizable vestiges, no more
 Than of this breath, which shapes itself in words
 To speak of him, and instantly dissolves."

 The Pastor, pressed by thoughts which round his theme
 Still lingered, after a brief pause, resumed;
 "Noise is there not enough in doleful war,
 But that the heaven-born poet must stand forth,
 And lend the echoes of his sacred shell,
 To multiply and aggravate the din?
 Pangs are there not enough in hopeless love
 And, in requited passion, all too much
 Of turbulence, anxiety, and fear
 But that the minstrel of the rural shade
 Must tune his pipe, insidiously to nurse
 The perturbation in the suffering breast,
 And propagate its kind, far as he may?
 Ah who (and with such rapture as befits
 The hallowed theme) will rise and celebrate
 The good man's purposes and deeds; retrace
 His struggles, his discomfitures deplore,
 His triumphs hail, and glorify his end;
 That virtue, like the fumes and vapoury clouds
 Through fancy's heat redounding in the brain,
 And like the soft infections of the heart,
 By charm of measured words may spread o'er field,
 Hamlet, and town; and piety survive
 Upon the lips of men in hall or bower;
 Not for reproof, but high and warm delight,
 And grave encouragement, by song inspired?
 Vain thought! but wherefore murmur or repine?
 The memory of the just survives in heaven:
 And, without sorrow, will the ground receive
 That venerable clay. Meanwhile the best
 Of what lies here confines us to degrees
 In excellence less difficult to reach,
 And milder worth: nor need we travel far
 From those to whom our last regards were paid,
 For such example.
 Almost at the root
 Of that tall pine, the shadow of whose bare
 And slender stem, while here I sit at eve,
 Oft stretches towards me, like a long straight path
 Traced faintly in the greensward; there, beneath
 A plain blue stone, a gentle Dalesman lies,
 From whom, in early childhood, was withdrawn
 The precious gift of hearing. He grew up
 From year to year in loneliness of soul;
 And this deep mountain-valley was to him
 Soundless, with all its streams. The bird of dawn
 Did never rouse this Cottager from sleep
 With startling summons; not for his delight
 The vernal cuckoo shouted; not for him
 Murmured the labouring bee. When stormy winds
 Were working the broad bosom of the lake
 Into a thousand thousand sparkling waves,
 Rocking the trees, or driving cloud on cloud
 Along the sharp edge of yon lofty crags,
 The agitated scene before his eye
 Was silent as a picture: evermore
 Were all things silent, wheresoe'er he moved.
 Yet, by the solace of his own pure thoughts
 Upheld, he duteously pursued the round
 Of rural labours; the steep mountain-side
 Ascended, with his staff and faithful dog;
 The plough he guided, and the scythe he swayed;
 And the ripe corn before his sickle fell
 Among the jocund reapers. For himself,
 All watchful and industrious as he was,
 He wrought not: neither field nor flock he owned:
 No wish for wealth had place within his mind;
 Nor husband's love, nor father's hope or care.

 Though born a younger brother, need was none
 That from the floor of his paternal home
 He should depart, to plant himself anew.
 And when, mature in manhood, he beheld
 His parents laid in earth, no loss ensued
 Of rights to him; but he remained well pleased,
 By the pure bond of independent love,
 An inmate of a second family;
 The fellow-labourer and friend of him
 To whom the small inheritance had fallen.
 Nor deem that his mild presence was a weight
 That pressed upon his brother's house; for books
 Were ready comrades whom he could not tire;
 Of whose society the blameless Man
 Was never satiate. Their familiar voice,
 Even to old age, with unabated charm
 Beguiled his leisure hours; refreshed his thoughts;
 Beyond its natural elevation raised
 His introverted spirit; and bestowed
 Upon his life an outward dignity
 Which all acknowledged. The dark winter night,
 The stormy day, each had its own resource;
 Song of the muses, sage historic tale,
 Science severe, or word of holy Writ
 Announcing immortality and joy
 To the assembled spirits of just men
 Made perfect, and from injury secure.
 Thus soothed at home, thus busy in the field,
 To no perverse suspicion he gave way,
 No languor, peevishness, nor vain complaint:
 And they, who were about him, did not fail
 In reverence, or in courtesy; they prized
 His gentle manners: and his peaceful smiles,
 The gleams of his slow-varying countenance,
 Were met with answering sympathy and love.

 At length, when sixty years and five were told,
 A slow disease insensibly consumed
 The powers of nature: and a few short steps
 Of friends and kindred bore him from his home
 (Yon cottage shaded by the woody crags)
 To the profounder stillness of the grave.
 Nor was his funeral denied the grace
 Of many tears, virtuous and thoughtful grief;
 Heart-sorrow rendered sweet by gratitude.
 And now that monumental stone preserves
 His name, and unambitiously relates
 How long, and by what kindly outward aids,
 And in what pure contentedness of mind,
 The sad privation was by him endured.
 And yon tall pine-tree, whose composing sound
 Was wasted on the good Man's living ear,
 Hath now its own peculiar sanctity;
 And, at the touch of every wandering breeze,
 Murmurs, not idly, o'er his peaceful grave.

 Soul-cheering Light, most bountiful of things!
 Guide of our way, mysterious comforter!
 Whose sacred influence, spread through earth and heaven,
 We all too thanklessly participate,
 Thy gifts were utterly withheld from him
 Whose place of rest is near yon ivied porch.
 Yet, of the wild brooks ask if he complained;
 Ask of the channelled rivers if they held
 A safer, easier, more determined, course.
 What terror doth it strike into the mind
 To think of one, blind and alone, advancing
 Straight toward some precipice's airy brink!
 But, timely warned, 'He' would have stayed his steps,
 Protected, say enlightened, by his ear;
 And on the very edge of vacancy
 Not more endangered than a man whose eye
 Beholds the gulf beneath. No floweret blooms
 Throughout the lofty range of these rough hills,
 Nor in the woods, that could from him conceal
 Its birth-place; none whose figure did not live
 Upon his touch. The bowels of the earth
 Enriched with knowledge his industrious mind;
 The ocean paid him tribute from the stores
 Lodged in her bosom; and, by science led,
 His genius mounted to the plains of heaven.
 Methinks I see him how his eye-balls rolled,
 Beneath his ample brow, in darkness paired,
 But each instinct with spirit; and the frame
 Of the whole countenance alive with thought,
 Fancy, and understanding; while the voice
 Discoursed of natural or moral truth
 With eloquence, and such authentic power,
 That, in his presence, humbler knowledge stood
 Abashed, and tender pity overawed."

 "A noble and, to unreflecting minds,
 A marvellous spectacle," the Wanderer said,
 "Beings like these present! But proof abounds
 Upon the earth that faculties, which seem
 Extinguished, do not, 'therefore', cease to be.
 And to the mind among her powers of sense
 This transfer is permitted, not alone
 That the bereft their recompense may win;
 But for remoter purposes of love
 And charity; nor last nor least for this,
 That to the imagination may be given
 A type and shadow of an awful truth;
 How, likewise, under sufferance divine,
 Darkness is banished from the realms of death,
 By man's imperishable spirit, quelled.
 Unto the men who see not as we see
 Futurity was thought, in ancient times,
 To be laid open, and they prophesied.
 And know we not that from the blind have flowed
 The highest, holiest, raptures of the lyre;
 And wisdom married to immortal verse?"

 Among the humbler Worthies, at our feet
 Lying insensible to human praise,
 Love, or regret, 'whose' lineaments would next
 Have been portrayed, I guess not; but it chanced
 That, near the quiet churchyard where we sate,
 A team of horses, with a ponderous freight
 Pressing behind, adown a rugged slope,
 Whose sharp descent confounded their array,
 Came at that moment, ringing noisily.

 "Here," said the Pastor, "do we muse, and mourn
 The waste of death; and lo! the giant oak
 Stretched on his bier that massy timber wain;
 Nor fail to note the Man who guides the team."

 He was a peasant of the lowest class:
 Grey locks profusely round his temples hung
 In clustering curls, like ivy, which the bite
 Of winter cannot thin; the fresh air lodged
 Within his cheek, as light within a cloud;
 And he returned our greeting with a smile.
 When he had passed, the Solitary spake;
 "A Man he seems of cheerful yesterdays
 And confident to-morrows; with a face
 Not worldly-minded, for it bears too much
 Of Nature's impress, gaiety and health,
 Freedom and hope; but keen, withal, and shrewd.
 His gestures note, and hark! his tones of voice
 Are all vivacious as his mien and looks."

 The Pastor answered: "You have read him well.
 Year after year is added to his store
 With 'silent' increase: summers, winters past,
 Past or to come; yea, boldly might I say,
 Ten summers and ten winters of a space
 That lies beyond life's ordinary bounds,
 Upon his sprightly vigour cannot fix
 The obligation of an anxious mind,
 A pride in having, or a fear to lose;
 Possessed like outskirts of some large domain,
 By any one more thought of than by him
 Who holds the land in fee, its careless lord!
 Yet is the creature rational, endowed
 With foresight; hears, too, every sabbath day,
 The christian promise with attentive ear;
 Nor will, I trust, the Majesty of Heaven
 Reject the incense offered up by him,
 Though of the kind which beasts and birds present
 In grove or pasture; cheerfulness of soul,
 From trepidation and repining free.
 How many scrupulous worshippers fall down
 Upon their knees, and daily homage pay
 Less worthy, less religious even, than his!

 This qualified respect, the old Man's due,
 Is paid without reluctance; but in truth,"
 (Said the good Vicar with a fond half-smile)
 "I feel at times a motion of despite
 Towards one, whose bold contrivances and skill,
 As you have seen, bear such conspicuous part
 In works of havoc; taking from these vales,
 One after one, their proudest ornaments.
 Full oft his doings leave me to deplore
 Tall ash-tree, sown by winds, by vapours nursed,
 In the dry crannies of the pendent rocks;
 Light birch, aloft upon the horizon's edge,
 A veil of glory for the ascending moon;
 And oak whose roots by noontide dew were damped,
 And on whose forehead inaccessible
 The raven lodged in safety. Many a ship
 Launched into Morecamb-bay to 'him' hath owed
 Her strong knee-timbers, and the mast that bears
 The loftiest of her pendants; He, from park
 Or forest, fetched the enormous axle-tree
 That whirls (how slow itself!) ten thousand spindles:
 And the vast engine labouring in the mine,
 Content with meaner prowess, must have lacked
 The trunk and body of its marvellous strength,
 If his undaunted enterprise had failed
 Among the mountain coves.
 Yon household fir,
 A guardian planted to fence off the blast,
 But towering high the roof above, as if
 Its humble destination were forgot
 That sycamore, which annually holds
 Within its shade, as in a stately tent
 On all sides open to the fanning breeze,
 A grave assemblage, seated while they shear
 The fleece-encumbered flock the JOYFUL ELM,
 Around whose trunk the maidens dance in May
 And the LORD'S OAK would plead their several rights
 In vain, if he were master of their fate;
 His sentence to the axe would doom them all.
 But, green in age and lusty as he is,
 And promising to keep his hold on earth
 Less, as might seem, in rivalship with men
 Than with the forest's more enduring growth,
 His own appointed hour will come at last;
 And, like the haughty Spoilers of the world,
 This keen Destroyer, in his turn, must fall.

 Now from the living pass we once again:
 From Age," the Priest continued, "turn your thoughts;
 From Age, that often unlamented drops,
 And mark that daisied hillock, three spans long!
 Seven lusty Sons sate daily round the board
 Of Gold-rill side; and, when the hope had ceased
 Of other progeny, a Daughter then
 Was given, the crowning bounty of the whole;
 And so acknowledged with a tremulous joy
 Felt to the centre of that heavenly calm
 With which by nature every mother's soul
 Is stricken in the moment when her throes
 Are ended, and her ears have heard the cry
 Which tells her that a living child is born;
 And she lies conscious, in a blissful rest,
 That the dread storm is weathered by them both.

 The Father him at this unlooked-for gift
 A bolder transport seizes. From the side
 Of his bright hearth, and from his open door,
 Day after day the gladness is diffused
 To all that come, almost to all that pass;
 Invited, summoned, to partake the cheer
 Spread on the never-empty board, and drink
 Health and good wishes to his new-born girl,
 From cups replenished by his joyous hand.
 Those seven fair brothers variously were moved
 Each by the thoughts best suited to his years:
 But most of all and with most thankful mind
 The hoary grandsire felt himself enriched;
 A happiness that ebbed not, but remained
 To fill the total measure of his soul!
 From the low tenement, his own abode,
 Whither, as to a little private cell,
 He had withdrawn from bustle, care, and noise,
 To spend the sabbath of old age in peace,
 Once every day he duteously repaired
 To rock the cradle of the slumbering babe:
 For in that female infant's name he heard
 The silent name of his departed wife;
 Heart-stirring music! hourly heard that name;
 Full blest he was, 'Another Margaret Green,'
 Oft did he say, 'was come to Gold-rill side.'

 Oh! pang unthought of, as the precious boon
 Itself had been unlooked-for; oh! dire stroke
 Of desolating anguish for them all!
 Just as the Child could totter on the floor,
 And, by some friendly finger's help up-stayed,
 Range round the garden walk, while she perchance
 Was catching at some novelty of spring,
 Ground-flower, or glossy insect from its cell
 Drawn by the sunshine at that hopeful season
 The winds of March, smiting insidiously,
 Raised in the tender passage of the throat
 Viewless obstruction; whence, all unforewarned,
 The household lost their pride and soul's delight.
 But time hath power to soften all regrets,
 And prayer and thought can bring to worst distress
 Due resignation. Therefore, though some tears
 Fail not to spring from either Parent's eye
 Oft as they hear of sorrow like their own,
 Yet this departed Little-one, too long
 The innocent troubler of their quiet, sleeps
 In what may now be called a peaceful bed.

 On a bright day so calm and bright, it seemed
 To us, with our sad spirits, heavenly-fair
 These mountains echoed to an unknown sound;
 A volley, thrice repeated o'er the Corse
 Let down into the hollow of that grave,
 Whose shelving sides are red with naked mould.
 Ye rains of April, duly wet this earth!
 Spare, burning sun of midsummer, these sods,
 That they may knit together, and therewith
 Our thoughts unite in kindred quietness!
 Nor so the Valley shall forget her loss.
 Dear Youth, by young and old alike beloved,
 To me as precious as my own! Green herbs
 May creep (I wish that they would softly creep)
 Over thy last abode, and we may pass
 Reminded less imperiously of thee;
 The ridge itself may sink into the breast
 Of earth, the great abyss, and be no more;
 Yet shall not thy remembrance leave our hearts,
 Thy image disappear!
 The Mountain-ash
 No eye can overlook, when 'mid a grove
 Of yet unfaded trees she lifts her head
 Decked with autumnal berries, that outshine
 Spring's richest blossoms; and ye may have marked,
 By a brook-side or solitary tarn,
 How she her station doth adorn: the pool
 Glows at her feet, and all the gloomy rocks
 Are brightened round her. In his native vale
 Such and so glorious did this Youth appear;
 A sight that kindled pleasure in all hearts
 By his ingenuous beauty, by the gleam
 Of his fair eyes, by his capacious brow,
 By all the graces with which nature's hand
 Had lavishly arrayed him. As old bards
 Tell in their idle songs of wandering gods,
 Pan or Apollo, veiled in human form:
 Yet, like the sweet-breathed violet of the shade
 Discovered in their own despite to sense
 Of mortals (if such fables without blame
 May find chance-mention on this sacred ground)
 So, through a simple rustic garb's disguise,
 And through the impediment of rural cares,
 In him revealed a scholar's genius shone;
 And so, not wholly hidden from men's sight,
 In him the spirit of a hero walked
 Our unpretending valley. How the quoit
 Whizzed from the Stripling's arm! If touched by him,
 The inglorious foot-ball mounted to the pitch
 Of the lark's flight, or shaped a rainbow curve,
 Aloft, in prospect of the shouting field!
 The indefatigable fox had learned
 To dread his perseverance in the chase.
 With admiration would he lift his eyes
 To the wide-ruling eagle, and his hand
 Was loth to assault the majesty he loved:
 Else had the strongest fastnesses proved weak
 To guard the royal brood. The sailing glead,
 The wheeling swallow, and the darting snipe;
 The sportive sea-gull dancing with the waves,
 And cautious water-fowl, from distant climes,
 Fixed at their seat, the centre of the Mere;
 Were subject to young Oswald's steady aim,
 And lived by his forbearance.
 From the coast
 Of France a boastful Tyrant hurled his threats;
 Our Country marked the preparation vast
 Of hostile forces; and she called with voice
 That filled her plains, that reached her utmost shores,
 And in remotest vales was heard to arms!
 Then, for the first time, here you might have seen
 The shepherd's grey to martial scarlet changed,
 That flashed uncouthly through the woods and fields.
 Ten hardy Striplings, all in bright attire,
 And graced with shining weapons, weekly marched,
 From this lone valley, to a central spot
 Where, in assemblage with the flower and choice
 Of the surrounding district, they might learn
 The rudiments of war; ten hardy, strong,
 And valiant; but young Oswald, like a chief
 And yet a modest comrade, led them forth
 From their shy solitude, to face the world,
 With a gay confidence and seemly pride;
 Measuring the soil beneath their happy feet
 Like Youths released from labour, and yet bound
 To most laborious service, though to them
 A festival of unencumbered ease;
 The inner spirit keeping holiday,
 Like vernal ground to sabbath sunshine left.

 Oft have I marked him, at some leisure hour,
 Stretched on the grass, or seated in the shade,
 Among his fellows, while an ample map
 Before their eyes lay carefully outspread,
 From which the gallant teacher would discourse,
 Now pointing this way, and now that. 'Here flows,'
 Thus would he say, 'the Rhine, that famous stream!
 'Eastward, the Danube toward this inland sea,
 'A mightier river, winds from realm to realm;
 'And, like a serpent, shows his glittering back
 'Bespotted with innumerable isles:
 'Here reigns the Russian, there the Turk; observe
 'His capital city!' Thence, along a tract
 Of livelier interest to his hopes and fears,
 His finger moved, distinguishing the spots
 Where wide-spread conflict then most fiercely raged;
 Nor left unstigmatized those fatal fields
 On which the sons of mighty Germany
 Were taught a base submission. 'Here behold
 'A nobler race, the Switzers, and their land,
 'Vales deeper far than these of ours, huge woods,
 'And mountains white with everlasting snow!'
 And, surely, he, that spake with kindling brow,
 Was a true patriot, hopeful as the best
 Of that young peasantry, who, in our days,
 Have fought and perished for Helvetia's rights
 Ah, not in vain! or those who, in old time,
 For work of happier issue, to the side
 Of Tell came trooping from a thousand huts,
 When he had risen alone! No braver Youth
 Descended from Judean heights, to march
 With righteous Joshua; nor appeared in arms
 When grove was felled, and altar was cast down,
 And Gideon blew the trumpet, soul-inflamed,
 And strong in hatred of idolatry."

 The Pastor, even as if by these last words
 Raised from his seat within the chosen shade,
 Moved toward the grave; instinctively his steps
 We followed; and my voice with joy exclaimed:
 "Power to the Oppressors of the world is given,
 A might of which they dream not. Oh! the curse,
 To be the awakener of divinest thoughts,
 Father and founder of exalted deeds;
 And, to whole nations bound in servile straits,
 The liberal donor of capacities
 More than heroic! this to be, nor yet
 Have sense of one connatural wish, nor yet
 Deserve the least return of human thanks;
 Winning no recompense but deadly hate
 With pity mixed, astonishment with scorn!"

 When this involuntary strain had ceased,
 The Pastor said: "So Providence is served;
 The forked weapon of the skies can send
 Illumination into deep, dark holds,
 Which the mild sunbeam hath not power to pierce.
 Ye Thrones that have defied remorse, and cast
 Pity away, soon shall ye quake with 'fear'!
 For, not unconscious of the mighty debt
 Which to outrageous wrong the sufferer owes,
 Europe, through all her habitable bounds,
 Is thirsting for 'their' overthrow, who yet
 Survive, as pagan temples stood of yore,
 By horror of their impious rites, preserved;
 Are still permitted to extend their pride,
 Like cedars on the top of Lebanon
 Darkening the sun.
 But less impatient thoughts,
 And love 'all hoping and expecting all,'
 This hallowed grave demands, where rests in peace
 A humble champion of the better cause,
 A Peasant-youth, so call him, for he asked
 No higher name; in whom our country showed,
 As in a favourite son, most beautiful.
 In spite of vice, and misery, and disease,
 Spread with the spreading of her wealthy arts,
 England, the ancient and the free, appeared
 In him to stand before my swimming eyes,
 Unconquerably virtuous and secure.
 No more of this, lest I offend his dust:
 Short was his life, and a brief tale remains.

 One day a summer's day of annual pomp
 And solemn chase from morn to sultry noon
 His steps had followed, fleetest of the fleet,
 The red-deer driven along its native heights
 With cry of hound and horn; and, from that toil
 Returned with sinews weakened and relaxed,
 This generous Youth, too negligent of self,
 Plunged 'mid a gay and busy throng convened
 To wash the fleeces of his Father's flock
 Into the chilling flood. Convulsions dire
 Seized him, that self-same night; and through the space
 Of twelve ensuing days his frame was wrenched,
 Till nature rested from her work in death.
 To him, thus snatched away, his comrades paid
 A soldier's honours. At his funeral hour
 Bright was the sun, the sky a cloudless blue
 A golden lustre slept upon the hills;
 And if by chance a stranger, wandering there,
 From some commanding eminence had looked
 Down on this spot, well pleased would he have seen
 A glittering spectacle; but every face
 Was pallid: seldom hath that eye been moist
 With tears, that wept not then; nor were the few,
 Who from their dwellings came not forth to join
 In this sad service, less disturbed than we.
 They started at the tributary peal
 Of instantaneous thunder, which announced,
 Through the still air, the closing of the Grave;
 And distant mountains echoed with a sound
 Of lamentation, never heard before!"

 The Pastor ceased. My venerable Friend
 Victoriously upraised his clear bright eye;
 And, when that eulogy was ended, stood
 Enrapt, as if his inward sense perceived
 The prolongation of some still response,
 Sent by the ancient Soul of this wide land,
 The Spirit of its mountains and its seas,
 Its cities, temples, fields, its awful power,
 Its rights and virtues by that Deity
 Descending, and supporting his pure heart
 With patriotic confidence and joy.
 And, at the last of those memorial words,
 The pining Solitary turned aside;
 Whether through manly instinct to conceal
 Tender emotions spreading from the heart
 To his worn cheek; or with uneasy shame
 For those cold humours of habitual spleen
 That, fondly seeking in dispraise of man
 Solace and self-excuse, had sometimes urged
 To self-abuse a not ineloquent tongue.
 Right toward the sacred Edifice his steps
 Had been directed; and we saw him now
 Intent upon a monumental stone,
 Whose uncouth form was grafted on the wall,
 Or rather seemed to have grown into the side
 Of the rude pile; as oft-times trunks of trees,
 Where nature works in wild and craggy spots,
 Are seen incorporate with the living rock
 To endure for aye. The Vicar, taking note
 Of his employment, with a courteous smile
 Exclaimed
 "The sagest Antiquarian's eye
 That task would foil;" then, letting fall his voice
 While he advanced, thus spake: "Tradition tells
 That, in Eliza's golden days, a Knight
 Came on a war-horse sumptuously attired,
 And fixed his home in this sequestered vale.
 'Tis left untold if here he first drew breath,
 Or as a stranger reached this deep recess,
 Unknowing and unknown. A pleasing thought
 I sometimes entertain, that haply bound
 To Scotland's court in service of his Queen,
 Or sent on mission to some northern Chief
 Of England's realm, this vale he might have seen
 With transient observation; and thence caught
 An image fair, which, brightening in his soul
 When joy of war and pride of chivalry
 Languished beneath accumulated years,
 Had power to draw him from the world, resolved
 To make that paradise his chosen home
 To which his peaceful fancy oft had turned.

 Vague thoughts are these; but, if belief may rest
 Upon unwritten story fondly traced
 From sire to son, in this obscure retreat
 The Knight arrived, with spear and shield, and borne
 Upon a Charger gorgeously bedecked
 With broidered housings. And the lofty Steed
 His sole companion, and his faithful friend,
 Whom he, in gratitude, let loose to range
 In fertile pastures was beheld with eyes
 Of admiration and delightful awe,
 By those untravelled Dalesmen. With less pride,
 Yet free from touch of envious discontent,
 They saw a mansion at his bidding rise,
 Like a bright star, amid the lowly band
 Of their rude homesteads. Here the Warrior dwelt;
 And, in that mansion children of his own,
 Or kindred, gathered round him. As a tree
 That falls and disappears, the house is gone;
 And, through improvidence or want of love
 For ancient worth and honourable things,
 The spear and shield are vanished, which the Knight
 Hung in his rustic hall. One ivied arch
 Myself have seen, a gateway, last remains
 Of that foundation in domestic care
 Raised by his hands. And now no trace is left
 Of the mild-hearted Champion, save this stone,
 Faithless memorial! and his family name
 Borne by yon clustering cottages, that sprang
 From out the ruins of his stately lodge:
 These, and the name and title at full length,
 'Sir Alfred Irthing', with appropriate words
 Accompanied, still extant, in a wreath
 Or posy, girding round the several fronts
 Of three clear-sounding and harmonious bells,
 That in the steeple hang, his pious gift."

 "So fails, so languishes, grows dim, and dies,"
 The grey-haired Wanderer pensively exclaimed,
 "All that this world is proud of. From their spheres
 The stars of human glory are cast down;
 Perish the roses and the flowers of kings,
 Princes, and emperors, and the crowns and palms
 Of all the mighty, withered and consumed!
 Nor is power given to lowliest innocence
 Long to protect her own. The man himself
 Departs; and soon is spent the line of those
 Who, in the bodily image, in the mind,
 In heart or soul, in station or pursuit,
 Did most resemble him. Degrees and ranks,
 Fraternities and orders heaping high
 New wealth upon the burthen of the old,
 And placing trust in privilege confirmed
 And re-confirmed are scoffed at with a smile
 Of greedy foretaste, from the secret stand
 Of Desolation, aimed: to slow decline
 These yield, and these to sudden overthrow:
 Their virtue, service, happiness, and state
 Expire; and nature's pleasant robe of green,
 Humanity's appointed shroud, enwraps
 Their monuments and their memory. The vast Frame
 Of social nature changes evermore
 Her organs and her members, with decay
 Restless, and restless generation, powers
 And functions dying and produced at need,
 And by this law the mighty whole subsists:
 With an ascent and progress in the main;
 Yet, oh! how disproportioned to the hopes
 And expectations of self-flattering minds!

 The courteous Knight, whose bones are here interred,
 Lived in an age conspicuous as our own
 For strife and ferment in the minds of men;
 Whence alteration in the forms of things,
 Various and vast. A memorable age!
 Which did to him assign a pensive lot
 To linger 'mid the last of those bright clouds
 That, on the steady breeze of honour, sailed
 In long procession calm and beautiful.
 He who had seen his own bright order fade,
 And its devotion gradually decline,
 (While war, relinquishing the lance and shield,
 Her temper changed, and bowed to other laws)
 Had also witnessed, in his morn of life,
 That violent commotion, which o'erthrew,
 In town and city and sequestered glen,
 Altar, and cross, and church of solemn roof,
 And old religious house pile after pile;
 And shook their tenants out into the fields,
 Like wild beasts without home! Their hour was come;
 But why no softening thought of gratitude,
 No just remembrance, scruple, or wise doubt?
 Benevolence is mild; nor borrows help,
 Save at worst need, from bold impetuous force,
 Fitliest allied to anger and revenge.
 But Human-kind rejoices in the might
 Of mutability; and airy hopes,
 Dancing around her, hinder and disturb
 Those meditations of the soul that feed
 The retrospective virtues. Festive songs
 Break from the maddened nations at the sight
 Of sudden overthrow; and cold neglect
 Is the sure consequence of slow decay.

 Even," said the Wanderer, "as that courteous Knight,
 Bound by his vow to labour for redress
 Of all who suffer wrong, and to enact
 By sword and lance the law of gentleness,
 (If I may venture of myself to speak,
 Trusting that not incongruously I blend
 Low things with lofty) I too shall be doomed
 To outlive the kindly use and fair esteem
 Of the poor calling which my youth embraced
 With no unworthy prospect. But enough;
 Thoughts crowd upon me and 'twere seemlier now
 To stop, and yield our gracious Teacher thanks
 For the pathetic records which his voice
 Hath here delivered; words of heartfelt truth,
 Tending to patience when affliction strikes;
 To hope and love; to confident repose
 In God; and reverence for the dust of Man."
