OF THE EYE.
From The notebooks of Leonardo Da Vinci 

If the eye is required to look at an object placed too near to it, it cannot judge of it well -- as happens to a man who tries to see the tip of his nose. Hence, as a general rule, Nature teaches us that an object can never be seen perfectly unless the space between it and the eye is equal, at least, to the length of the face.
































































On Painting. 
From the notebooks of Leonardo Da Vinci

The eye will hold and retain in itself the image of a luminous body better than that of a shaded object. The reason is that the eye is in itself perfectly dark and since two things that are alike cannot be distinguished, therefore the night, and other dark objects cannot be seen or recognized by the eye. Light is totally contrary and gives more distinctness, and counteracts and differs from the usual darkness of the eye, hence it leaves the impression of its image.































































On Painting. From the notebooks of Leonardo Da Vinci
Every object we see will appear larger at midnight than at midday, and larger in the morning than at midday.
This happens because the pupil of the eye is much smaller at midday than at any other time.






























































On Perspective.
From the notebooks of Leonardo Da Vinci

The pupil of the eye, in the open air, changes in size with every degree of motion from the sun; and at every degree of its changes one and the same object seen by it will appear of a different size; although most frequently the relative scale of surrounding objects does not allow us to detect these variations in any single object we may look at.
































































On Painting.
From the notebooks of Leonardo Da Vinci

The art of perspective is of such a nature as to make what is flat appear in relief and what is in relief flat.


































































DEFINITION OF THE NATURE OF THE LINE.From the notebooks of Leonardo Da Vinci
The line has in itself neither matter nor substance and may rather be called an imaginary idea than a real object; and this being its nature it occupies no space. Therefore an infinite number of lines may be conceived of as intersecting each other at a point, which has no dimensions and is only of the thickness (if thickness it may be called) of one single line.





























































TO PROVE HOW OBJECTS REACH THE EYE.From the notebooks of Leonardo Da Vinci
If you look at the sun or some other luminous body and then shut your eyes you will see it again inside your eye for a long time. This is evidence that images enter into the eye.































































PERSPECTIVE.From the notebooks of Leonardo Da Vinci
The instant the atmosphere is illuminated it will be filled with an infinite number of images which are produced by the various bodies and colors assembled in it. And the eye is the target, a loadstone, of these images.























OF THE CENTRAL LINE OF THE EYE.From the notebooks of Leonardo Da Vinci
Only one line of the image, of all those that reach the visual virtue, has no intersection; and this has no sensible dimensions because it is a mathematical line which originates from a mathematical point, which has no dimensions.























WHAT LIGHT AND SHADOW ARE.From the notebooks of Leonardo Da Vinci
Shadow is the absence of light, merely the obstruction of the luminous rays by an opaque body. Shadow is of the nature of darkness. Light [on an object] is of the nature of a luminous body; one conceals and the other reveals. They are always associated and inseparable from all objects. But shadow is a more powerful agent than light, for it can impede and entirely deprive bodies of their light, while light can never entirely expel shadow from a body, which is from an opaque body.






















ON THE THREE BRANCHES OF PERSPECTIVE.From The Notebooks of Leonardo Da Vinci
There are three branches of perspective; the first deals with the reasons of the (apparent) diminution of objects as they recede from the eye, and is known as Diminishing Perspective. -- The second contains the way in which colours vary as they recede from the eye. The third and last is concerned with the explanation of how the objects [in a picture] ought to be less finished in proportion as they are remote (and the names are as follows):
Linear Perspective. The Perspective of Color. The Perspective of  Disappearance.




















OF THE MISTAKES MADE BY THOSE WHO PRACTISE WITHOUT KNOWLEDGE.From The Notebooks of Leonardo Da Vinci
Those who are in love with practice without knowledge are like the sailor who gets into a ship without rudder or compass and who never can be certain whether he is going. Practice must always be founded on sound theory, and to this Perspective is the guide and the gateway; and without this nothing can be done well (in the matter of drawing).




















INTRODUCTION TO PERSPECTIVE: -- THAT IS OF THE FUNCTION OF THE EYE.From the Notebooks of Leonardo Da Vinci
Behold here O reader! a thing concerning which we cannot trust our forefathers, the ancients, who tried to define what the Soul and Life are -- which are beyond proof, whereas those things, which can at any time be clearly known and proved by experience, remained for many ages unknown or falsely understood. The eye, whose function we so certainly know by experience, has, down to my own time, been defined by an infinite number of authors as one thing; but I find, by experience, that it is quite another.











































On the Eye.From the Notebooks of Leonardo Da Vinci
Here [in the eye] forms, here colors, here the character of every part of the universe are concentrated to a point; and that point is so marvelous a thing ... Oh! marvelous, O stupendous Necessity -- by your laws you do compel every effect to be the direct result of its cause, by the shortest path. These [indeed] are miracles!












































OF LIGHT AND LUSTRE.From the Notebooks of Leonardo Da Vinci
What is the difference between light and the luster which is seen on the polished surface of opaque bodies?
The lights which are produced from the polished surface of opaque bodies will be stationary on stationary objects even if the eye on which they strike moves. But reflected lights will, on those same objects, appear in as many different places on the surface as different positions are taken by the eye.



















OF THE DIFFERENT LIGHT AND SHADE IN VARIOUS ASPECTS AND OF OBJECTS PLACED IN THEM.From the Notebooks of Leonardo Da Vinci
If the sun is in the East and you look towards the West you will see every thing in full light and totally without shadow because you see them from the same side as the sun: and if you look towards the South or North you will see all objects in light and shade, because you see both the side towards the sun and the side away from it; and if you look towards the coming of the sun all objects will show you their shaded side, because on that side the sun cannot fall upon them.
The law of the incidence of light.


















HOW SHADOWS FADE AWAY AT LONG DISTANCES.From the Notebooks of Leonardo Da Vinci
Shadows fade and are lost at long distances because the larger quantity of illuminated air which lies between the eye and the object seen tints the shadow with its own color.





















The Mirror.From the Notebooks of Leonardo Da Vinci
Describe how it is that no object has its limitation in the mirror but in the eye which sees it in the mirror. For if you look at your face in the mirror, the part resembles the whole in as much as the part is everywhere in the mirror, and the whole is in every part of the same mirror; and the same is true of the whole image of any object placed opposite to this mirror.




















PERSPECTIVE.From the Notebooks of Leonardo Da Vinci
If you transmit the rays of the sun through a hole in the shape of a star you will see a beautiful effect of perspective in the spot where the sun's rays fall.





















OF LIGHT AND SHADE.From the Notebooks of Leonardo Da Vinci
You who draw from nature, look (carefully) at the extent, the degree, and the form of the lights and shadows on each muscle; and in their position lengthwise observe towards which muscle the axis of the central line is directed.




















OF LIGHT.From the Notebooks of Leonardo Da Vinci
A luminous body when obscured by a dense atmosphere will appear smaller; as may be seen by the moon or sun veiled by mists.





















From the Notebooks of Leonardo Da Vinci
Relative proportion of the hand and foot.
The foot is as much longer than the hand as the thickness of the arm at the wrist where it is thinnest seen facing.
Again, you will find that the foot is as much longer than the hand as the space between the inner angle of the little toe to the last projection of the big toe, if you measure along the length of the foot.
The palm of the hand without the fingers goes twice into the length of the foot without the toes.
If you hold your hand with the fingers straight out and close together you will find it to be of the same width as the widest part of the foot, that is where it is joined onto the toes.
And if you measure from the prominence of the inner ankle to the end of the great toe you will find this measure to be as long as the whole hand.
From the top angle of the foot to the insertion of the toes is equal to the hand from wrist joint to the tip of the thumb.
The smallest width of the hand is equal to the smallest width of the foot between its joint into the leg and the insertion of the toes.
The width of the heel at the lower part is equal to that of the arm where it joins the hand; and also to the leg where it is thinnest when viewed in front.
The length of the longest toe, from its first division from the great toe to its tip is the fourth of the foot from the center of the ankle bone to the tip, and it is equal to the width of the mouth. The distance between the mouth and the chin is equal to that of the knuckles and of the three middle fingers and to the length of their first joints if the hand is spread, and equal to the distance from the joint of the thumb to the outset of the nails, that is the fourth part of the hand and of the face.
The space between the extreme poles inside and outside the foot called the ankle or ankle bone a b is equal to the space between the mouth and the inner corner of the eye.







From the Notebooks of Leonardo Da Vinci
In kneeling down a man will lose the fourth part of his height.
When a man kneels down with his hands folded on his breast the navel will mark half his height and likewise the points of the elbows.
Half the height of a man who sits -- that is from the seat to the top of the head -- will be where the arms fold below the breast, and below the shoulders. The seated portion -- that is from the seat to the top of the head -- will be more than half the man's [whole height] by the length of the scrotum.


















From the Notebooks of Leonardo Da Vinci
From the tip of the longest finger of the hand to the shoulder joint is four hands or, if you will, four faces.






















From the Notebooks of Leonardo Da Vinci
In the innermost bend of the joints of every limb the reliefs are converted into a hollow, and likewise every hollow of the innermost bends becomes a convexity when the limb is straightened to the utmost. And in this very great mistakes are often made by those who have insufficient knowledge and trust to their own invention and do not have recourse to the imitation of nature; and these variations occur more in the middle of the sides than in front, and more at the back than at the sides.















































































































