Emily Dickinson
I'm nobody! Who are you? Are you nobody, too? Then there 's a pair of us  --  don't tell! They 'd banish us, you know.
How dreary to be somebody! How public, like a frog To tell your name the livelong day To an admiring bog!












































Emily Dickinson

Surgeons must be very careful 
When they take the knife! 
Underneath their fine incisions 
Stirs the culprit,  --  Life!

















































Emily Dickinson

A death-blow is a life-blow to some
 Who, till they died, did not alive become; 
Who, had they lived, had died, but when 
They died, vitality begun.


















































Emily Dickinson

She died,  --  this was the way she died; And when her breath was done, Took up her simple wardrobe And started for the sun.
Her little figure at the gate The angels must have spied, Since I could never find her Upon the mortal side.












































Emily Dickinson on a Word

A word is dead When it is said,   Some say. I say it just Begins to live  That day.

















































Emily Dickinson on Life's Trades

It's such a little thing to weep,   
So short a thing to sigh; 
And yet by trades the size of these   
We men and women die!


















































Emily Dickinson

Who has not found the heaven below   Will fail of it above. God's residence is next to mine,   His furniture is love.

















































Emily Dickinson on the Lost Thought

I felt a clearing in my mind   As if my brain had split; I tried to match it, seam by seam,   But could not make them fit.
The thought behind I strove to join   Unto the thought before, But sequence raveled out of reach   Like balls upon a floor.


















Emily Dickinson on the Brain
The brain is wider than the sky,   For, put them side by side, The one the other will include   With ease, and you beside.
The brain is deeper than the sea,   For, hold them, blue to blue, The one the other will absorb,   As sponges, buckets do.
The brain is just the weight of God,  For, lift them, pound for pound, And they will differ, if they do,  As syllable from sound.
















Emily Dickinson on the Past

The past is such a curious creature,   To look her in the face A transport may reward us,   Or a disgrace.
Unarmed if any meet her,  I charge him, fly! Her rusty ammunition   Might yet reply!

















Emily Dickinson
To make a prairie it takes a clover and one bee,  --  One clover, and a bee, And revery. The revery alone will do If bees are few.




















Emily Dickinson on the Wind
It's like the light,  --    A fashionless delight It's like the bee,  --    A dateless melody.
It's like the woods,   Private like breeze, Phraseless, yet it stirs   The proudest trees.
It's like the morning,  --    Best when it's done,  --  The everlasting clocks   Chime noon.








































Emily Dickinson on the Evening
The cricket sang, And set the sun, And workmen finished, one by one,   Their seam the day upon.
The low grass loaded with the dew, The twilight stood as strangers do With hat in hand, polite and new,   To stay as if, or go.
A vastness, as a neighbor, came,  --  A wisdom without face or name, A peace, as hemispheres at home,  --    And so the night became.








































Emily Dickinson on Cocoon
Drab habitation of whom? Tabernacle or tomb, Or dome of worm, Or porch of gnome, Or some elf's catacomb?




















Emily Dickinson on Immortality
It is an honorable thought,   And makes one lift one's hat, As one encountered gentlefolk  Upon a daily street,
That we've immortal place,   Though pyramids decay, And kingdoms, like the orchard,  Flit russetly away.


















Emily Dickinson
The distance that the dead have gone   Does not at first appear; Their coming back seems possible   For many an ardent year.
And then, that we have followed them   We more than half suspect, So intimate have we become   With their dear retrospect.


















Emily Dickinson on Death

Death is like the insect   Menacing the tree, Competent to kill it,   But decoyed may be.
Bait it with the balsam,   Seek it with the knife, Baffle, if it cost you   Everything in life.
Then, if it have burrowed   Out of reach of skill, Ring the tree and leave it,  --   'T is the vermin's will.















Emily Dickinson
Each that we lose takes part of us;   A crescent still abides, Which like the moon, some turbid night,   Is summoned by the tides.




















Emily Dickinson
Where every bird is bold to go,   And bees abashless play, The foreigner before he knocks   Must thrust the tears away.




















Emily Dickinson
Me! Come! My dazzled face In such a shining place!
Me! Hear! My foreign ear The sounds of welcome near!
The saints shall meet Our bashful feet.
My holiday shall be That they remember me;
My paradise, the fame That they pronounce my name.
















Emily Dickinson
I wish I knew that woman's name,   So, when she comes this way, To hold my life, and hold my ears,   For fear I hear her say
She's 'sorry I am dead,' again,   Just when the grave and I Have sobbed ourselves almost to sleep,  --    Our only lullaby.


















Emily Dickinson
So proud she was to die   It made us all ashamed That what we cherished, so unknown   To her desire seemed.
So satisfied to go   Where none of us should be, Immediately, that anguish stooped   Almost to jealousy.










































Emily Dickinson
The dying need but little, dear,  --    A glass of water's all, A flower's unobtrusive face   To punctuate the wall,
A fan, perhaps, a friend's regret,   And certainly that one No color in the rainbow   Perceives when you are gone.


















Emily Dickinson on Dying
I heard a fly buzz when I died;   The stillness round my form Was like the stillness in the air   Between the heaves of storm.
The eyes beside had wrung them dry,   And breaths were gathering sure For that last onset, when the king   Be witnessed in his power.
I willed my keepsakes, signed away   What portion of me I Could make assignable,  --  and then   There interposed a fly,
With blue, uncertain, stumbling buzz,   Between the light and me; And then the windows failed, and then  I could not see to see.











































































