By Theognis
Fools and children you are, mankind! You mourn
The dead and not the dying flower of youth. 
By Theognis
Nothing destroys a good man quicker than poverty;
Not malarial fever, God, nor old age. 
Better to hurl oneself in the damned sea
Over a high cliff -- than be a victim
Of poverty. The poor man can do or say nothing 
Worthwhile. Even his mouth is broke. 
By Plato
I throw this apple before you. 
Take it -- if you love me purely, 
And give up your virginity. 
But if you will not love me
Keep the apple -- and think
How long the beauty lasts. 
Plato on the Equality of Death
I'm a sailor's tomb. Beside me lies a farmer. 
Hell is the same, under the land and sea. 
A Shopping Tip by Lucillius, first century a.d.
Lady, you went to the market
And picked up hair, rouge, honey, wax and eyelashes.
For that amount you might have bought a face. 
Lucillius on Boxers

Here you see the ruins of a former Olympic star. 
Once he had a real nose, mind you, a chin, forehead, ears, and eyes (lids and all),
And then he went pro. 
He scrambles everything, 
Even his share of his father's estate. 
For his kid brother showed up
(a spitting image of the former champ)
and the pug
(who looked like an outsider now)
was quietly but sternly ushered away. 
A Natural Sundial
By Traianus (The Emperor Trajan)
If you point your big nose sunward
And open your gaping mouth, 
All who pass by
Will know the time of day. 
Dionysus Sophistes to a Vendor of Flowers
You selling roses have a flowery charm.
But rose-girl, what are you selling me?
Your roses? Yourself? Or both? 
Lucian on Magical Whiskers
If by growing a goatee you hope to come upon wisdom, 
Then, my friend, any smelly goat in a handsome beard
Is at once Plato. 
Calculation
By Julianus (Julian the Apostate) 
Jules is but two feet tall -- his wife four. 
When flat in bed
Their feet touching the wall,
Imagine where Jules keeps his lips. 
Intimate Dialogue by Agathias Scholastikos
A. What are you upset about?
B. I'm in love. 
A. With who?
B. A virgin.
A. Is she good looking? 
B. Drop dead gorgeous. 
A. Where did you meet her? 
B. At a dinner party. We were sitting on the same couch. 
A. You think you'll get in?
B. Yes, yes, my friend, but I don't wish to broadcast it. Actually I want it to be nice and discreet. 
A. You mean you want to avoid marriage?
B. My friend, I found out she isn't worth a dime. 
A. You know this already. You are not in love, dear friend. You are lying. How can your heart be madly in love when it calculates so well?
Glykon on Life without Meaning
All is laughter and dust. And all is nothing, 
Since our of unreason comes all that is. 
Korinna on Herself
Will you sleep forever? There was a time, 
Korinna, when you were not such a lazy ass. 
